---
Pr-id: Society of the Query  
P-id: INC Readers  
A-id: 9  
Type: article  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id: 00001  
Article-title: Is Small Really Beautiful? Big Search and Its Alternatives  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: Astrid Mager  
Author-email: info@astridmager.org  
Author-bio: >
    Astrid Mager, Dr. Phil, is a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute of Technology Assessement (ITA), Austrian Academy of Sciences, and a lecturer at the Department of Science and Technology Studies, University of Vienna. At present, she is leader of the project “Glocal Search. Search technology at the intersection of global capitalism and local socio-political cultures” (funded by the Jubiläumsfonds of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB), project number 14702). Her theoretical background is in Science and Technology Studies (STS) and her primary research interests include internet and society, search engine politics, knowledge production, privacy, digital methods, and critical theory. Recent publications: “Technoscientific promotion and biofuel policy. How the press and search engines stage the biofuel controversy”, in Media, Culture & Society, 2013 (together with Jenny Eklöf), “Algorithmic ideology. How capitalist society shapes search engines”, in Information, Communication & Society, 2012, “Search engines matter: From educating users towards engaging with online health information practices, Policy & Internet, 2012. Visit http://www.astridmager.net.  
Abstract: >
    Astrid Mager discusses critically a selection of so-called alternative search engines and their ideological underpinnings. If Google embodies the capitalist ideology, what ideology do alternative search engines incorporate? Privacy-concerned search tools, green, scientific, and peer-to-peer search engines are examined.  
Keywords: Institute of Network Cultures, Society of the Query, internet, search, search engines, web search, online search, Google, Astrid Mager, alternatives, ideology, green search, privacy, DuckDuckGo, Bing, Yahoo, data, technology, society, algorithm, user, algortihm, method, semantic search, metaphor, peer-to-peer, YaCy  
Rights: Creative Commons  

---

Google is big in many ways. The company offers a myriad of services and
products ranging from basic keyword search to futuristic glass
technology. It possesses the most comprehensive index of the web and the
most extensive database of user data, and its ranking algorithm is state
of the art. Google figures as search engine number one, at least in the
Western world, and is also the leader in online advertising. Just
recently, it has been accused of collaborating with the U.S. National
Security Agency (NSA), exemplifying its powerful role in collecting and
profiling personal data.[^1] In debates on big data, the conventional
argument is that big data needs big methods to be mined and made
productive for users. In light of big data, Google may be seen as *the*
biggest method applied when trying to bring order to the web, to find
answers to questions, to sift through the sea of information.

| Search engine   | Ideology                    |
| --------------- |:---------------------------:|
| Google          | Capitalistic; monopoly      |
| Bing            | Capitalistic; collaborative |
| Yacy            | Distributed; decentralized  |
| Wolfram\|Alpha  | Knowledge engine            |

It is thus not surprising that Google is a flourishing company, and its
algorithm incorporates and strengthens the capitalist ideology. Rather
than blaming Google for doing evil, however, I suggest thinking of
Google as being shaped by society. Google shows us the face of
capitalism because it was born and raised in a capitalist society.
‘Technology is society made durable’, as Bruno Latour put it.[^2]
Accordingly, Google is not the only actor to blame. Quite on the
contrary, actors such as policy makers, jurists, journalists, search
engine optimizers, website providers, and, last but not least, users are
part of the game too. If users would turn away from Google, the whole
business model, including its sophisticated algorithm and database of
personal data, would fall apart. But where can people turn to? Are there
true alternatives to Google and their algorithmic ideology?

The goal of this article is to examine and discuss critically a
selection of so-called alternative search engines and their ideological
underpinnings. If Google embodies the capitalist ideology, what ideology
do alternative search engines incorporate? What values do
privacy-concerned search tools such as DuckDuckGo carry? What is green
about green search engines? Can peer-to-peer search engines such as YaCy
be interpreted as communist search engines? Could search be seen as a
scientific endeavor as Wolfram|Alpha suggests?

##Big Search and Its Algorithmic Ideology 

In my previous work,[^3] I argue that algorithms, like all other
technologies, should not be understood as merely technical,
mathematical, or ‘objective’ tools, even though Google and its
competitors try to establish them as exactly that. Rather, they should
be seen as socially constructed entities mirroring and solidifying
socio-political norms and values. Drawing on interviews with search
engine experts,[^4] I show how ideologies become inscribed in search
algorithms by way of social practices. Following Luc Boltanski and Ève
Chiapello,[^5] I interpret ideology not only as a moralizing discourse,
but as a set of shared beliefs, which are inscribed in institutions,
embedded in actual practices, and hence anchored in reality. Along this
line of thought, I show how ideology becomes manifested in search
technology, Google in particular.

Google’s success is built on flat hierarchies, a flexible work force,
and a global scale, which are central characteristics of ‘the new spirit
of capitalism’.[^6] Furthermore, Google corresponds well to new modes of
exploitation that rose with this capitalist spirit. ‘*A form of
exploitation that develops in a connexionist world* – that is to say, a
world where the realization of profit occurs through organizing economic
operations in networks.’[^7] Scholars such as Matteo Pasquinelli and
Christian Fuchs explain how Google extracts value from networks.
Pasquinelli argues that Google’s PageRank algorithm exploits the
collective intelligence of the web since Google uses links from other
websites to measure a websites’ value. These links may be seen as a
concretion of intelligence that is used by Google to create surplus
value.[^8] Fuchs further hints at the importance of including users’
activities to understand Google’s capital accumulation cycle. Google not
only exploits website providers’ content, but also users’ practices and
data. Fuchs thus concludes that ‘Google is the ultimate economic
surveillance machine and the ultimate user-exploitation machine’.[^9] My
colleague Jenny Eklöf and I additionally show that the capitalist spirit
Google carries contributes to a commercialization of search results and
has thus wider implications on the way we approach information and make
sense of the world we live in.[^10]

But criticizing Google and its business model is not enough. It is
essential to understand power relations and social practices involved in
the construction and solidification of search algorithms. Website
providers and users are not simply exploited by Google (and others);
their desire for attention and information, but also for consumer goods,
is perfectly served by companies such as Google. Accordingly, users and
providers actively stabilize the technology by using it to reach their
own goals of gaining visibility and finding answers to their questions.
Also, services such as Google AdWords and Google AdSense would not work
if people would not advertise with or click on Google ads. Furthermore,
broader socio-political frameworks strengthen corporate actors like
Google. The politics of privatization of the last decades put search on
the free market. Despite past efforts, European policy makers have not
succeeded in establishing a non-corporate search engine. Consequently,
Google has become a powerful player challenging politics, law, and
economics in Europe and beyond. Whether lack of technical expertise and
carelessness have led to policy’s loss of control over search
technology, or whether governments actively decided to outsource search
and related tasks of data collection and citizen surveillance to big
companies to profit from their databases in post-9/11 societies, cannot
be answered here. What is certain, however, is that politics and also
mass media strongly participate in the stabilization of big players, the
latter by constantly featuring new services, products and, ultimately,
IT companies. This techno-euphoric breeding ground is about to change
now that more and more data protection violations and scandals such as
the NSA affair are critically discussed in the public domain. This shows
that search engines such as Google are not external to society, but
rather enacted and negotiated within society. Website providers, users,
marketers, journalists, policy makers, and jurists are all part of the
actor-network strengthening Google and its capitalist ideology.

This situation gives us the chance to opt out of Google’s accumulation
cycle, if we want to. If website providers and users broke out of the
network dynamic, Google’s power and its scheme of exploitation would
fall apart. If mass media and activists continue a critical debate about
search engines and the myriad of data they collect, store, and process,
big players would be destabilized. If politics and law took on a
stronger role in the regulation of search technology, limits would be
set regarding the collection and use of personal data, and also business
practices and advertising schemes. First steps towards a renegotiation
of search engines are seen on various levels. A new data protection law
is currently being negotiated in the E.U.. More critical media debates
on Google, Facebook, Amazon, and other IT companies are seen due to the
increase of tracking methods, privacy violations, illicit practices of
scraping WiFi data, and possible collaborations with secret services.

So the question is, why are users still not turning away from Google and
other big players? Why do they not leave big search and move towards
smaller search engines? The common answer, even amongst search engine
experts, is because there are no real alternatives. But is that actually
the case? What about all the other search projects trying to challenge
Google and provide an alternative style of search?

##Small Search and Its Ideological Inner Life

There are a number of so-called alternative search engines that are not
as big as Google, Bing, or Yahoo! and that lead their lives at the
margins of the search market. Of course, Bing could be conceptualized as
an alternative to Google in terms of its index and algorithm. However,
Bing may also be considered yet another for-profit search engine that is
no true alternative from an ideological standpoint. In line with the
purpose of this article I conceptualize alternative search engines as
search tools that claim to have a particular ideological agenda that
clearly distinguishes them from big, corporate search tools.[^11]
Accordingly, all search engines included in this analysis explicitly
devote themselves to a particular ideological framework. Further, all of
them are general-purpose search engines with no particular topical
focus, even though knowledge engines such as Wolfram|Alpha are
specialized in answering factual questions rather than cultural, social
scientific, or commercial ones, as I will exemplify later.

The central aim of this article is to discuss whether these chosen
search engines may be seen as true alternatives in terms of their
ideological stance and what norms, values, and ideas they carry.
Further, their self-descriptions will be juxtaposed with their actual
practices. Whether these search tools could be true alternatives on a
technical level or whether their search results are better than those of
their bigger relatives can only partly be answered since this would go
beyond the scope of this article.

### Privacy First

The first search engine in the analysis is DuckDuckGo, because it claims
to be a privacy-concerned search engine. DuckDuckGo was founded by the
entrepreneur Gabriel Weinberg, and its developers ‘believe in better
search and real privacy at the same time’.[^12] Its website further
explains that DuckDuckGo does not track, filter bubble, or share data
with third parties, and it goes on with a lengthy discussion of privacy
issues and a visual explanation of what it actually means to be tracked,
collected, and shared with third parties when using larger search
engines such as Google. So the company clearly tries to provide an
alternative to major search engines in terms of data protection and
anonymous search. Their default settings protect privacy rather than
collecting and offering personal data to third parties (which big search
engines usually do). They incorporate privacy in their technical Gestalt
and may hence be interpreted as following the principle of ‘Privacy by
Design’. Privacy by Design builds on the idea of integrating
privacy-relevant features into the design process of IT technologies to
enable ‘value-sensitive innovation’.[^13] But can privacy be seen as
their ideological framework?

Privacy is a moral concept, no doubt, and a central component of human
rights, one codified in international agreements and law including the
U.N.’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the E.U.’s Charter of
Fundamental Rights. More specifically, privacy is regulated in
recommendations and legal norms in the context of information
technologies, such as the OECD Privacy Guidelines and the E.U. Data
Protection Directive 95/46/EC.[^14] The latter is currently under
negotiation, since the European Commission plans to unify data
protection within the E.U. with a single, binding law, the General Data
Protection Regulation. But privacy is not only about rights; it comes
with ideas about autonomy and freedom, and it is an essential
prerequisite for democratic societies.[^15] Privacy can be seen as
something stronger than law and regulations; it may be interpreted as an
ideological tool to tame the free market, to set boundaries where
boundaries are missing, and to provide technological alternatives that
enable individual choice. DuckDuckGo may hence indeed be seen as
positioning itself as an ideological counterpart to Google with its
practice of user profiling. This tactic seems to work in times of
increasing privacy violations and scandals, as shown by the record
traffic on DuckDuckGo following the news coverage of Google’s possible
collaboration with the NSA.[^16]

So can this become a success story of David against Goliath? In terms of
data protection it probably can. When looked more closely, however,
DuckDuckGo is troubled with cosmetic flaws. Even though it does not sell
personal data to gain profit it does provide contextual advertising on
its site. Its ads are provided by Bing Ads and should adhere to their
privacy policy, as its website claims. But DuckDuckGo does not only use
Bing Ads; it also uses Bing’s search results. Although DuckDuckGo
operates its own web crawler, the DuckDuckBot, it is also dependent on
results from other search engines and sources. According to its
community platform it obtains its results from over 100 sources
including crowd-sourced sites such as Wikipedia and also for-profit
search tools, including Yandex, Wolfram|Alpha, Bing, and Yahoo! (the
latter also displaying Bing results).[^17] Maintaining its own web
crawler and building a comprehensive web index is a very expensive
endeavor.[^18] Consequently, most search engines either partner with one
search engine or use results from multiple sources. Since DuckDuckGo
uses both commercial and non-commercial sources, it partly depends on
for-profit search engines such as Bing, which does track users and sells
personal data to third parties.

So even if DuckDuckGo provides encrypted search and does not sell user
data to third parties itself, it does make use of big players and their
business practices. That DuckDuckGo is in alliance with commercial
players and their tracking methods, I would say, casts a shadow over the
company’s belief in privacy and fundamental rights. In fact, the company
needs big search in order to keep its small search engine running. This
situation similarly applies to other privacy-concerned search engines
including Ixquick[^19] and MetaGer,[^20] which also use results from
bigger search engines. While such companies fetch results from these
other search engines without saving users’ IP addresses or passing on
personal information, they still would not be able to exist without
their data-collecting counterparts.

### Green Search 

Another model of ideological search is green search. Green search
engines offer the possibility to support ecological projects financially
by using their search services. Ecosia, for instance, helps plant trees,
as it states most prominently on its homepage.[^21] The company
describes itself as a ‘social business’ based in Berlin, and its basic
idea is to donate 80 percent of its advertising revenue to the Nature
Conservancy, which helps to afforest the Brazilian rainforest. The ads
it displays on its site are served by Yahoo!, which pays Ecosia a share
of revenue generated from these ads. Ecosia’s own servers run on green
power. However, Ecosia’s search results come from Bing, which does not
use green energy. This is an example of what Dirk Lewandowski coins the
‘partner-index model’.[^22] Ecosia uses Bing’s partner index, and, in
turn, the advertising revenue is split between Yahoo! (partnering with
Bing) and Ecosia (donating 80 percent to the rain forest). Since online
searches are co-produced by computers, computer networks, and servers, a
great deal of CO2 emission are produced during each search (up to seven
grams of CO2 in the case of Google, according to a Harvard
physicist).[^23] To compensate for the CO2 emission generated by the
Bing searches, Ecosia supports a project in Madagascar.[^24]

When looking at its initiatives, Ecosia clearly follows a green agenda.
Contrary to search engines such as the Green Planet Search that help to
find ecological information,[^25] Ecosia enables users to take action.
Since environmentalism is increasingly embedded in everyday routines and
situated in objects,[^26] green search engines can function as a vehicle
to engage in environment protection. Similar to the recycling bin and
other objects, green search engines can be seen as a materialization of
civic engagement and political action. According to Noortje Marres such
objects ‘[…] have the capacity to turn everyday material activities into
forms of engagement with the environment […]’[^27] Green search engines
may hence be interpreted as ‘technologies of participation’[^28] that
make involvement easy since they do not require any significant change
in the practice itself (compared to green devices that would require
crucial material, social, and technical transformations).[^29]

Similar to privacy-concerned search engines, Ecosia’s green ideology is
endangered by its dependence on big search for both search results and
advertising revenue – a threat not only in an ideological but also a
very practical sense if we look at the history of green search projects.
There have been multiple green search engines in the past. Except from
Znout,[^30] which compensates Google searches with renewable energy
certificates, all of these companies have closed down. Businesses that
used Google search as their back-end, such as Ecocho, are no longer
supported by Google because they ‘jibe with Google’s AdSense policy,
which prohibits the compensation of third parties through the promise of
performed searches’.[^31]

Their fate hence exemplifies the difficulty that comes with depending on
a single search engine. Big players simply can stop supporting small
projects if they no longer harmonize with their own advertising policy.
Besides, green search engines actively support big search in terms of
their revenue model; they not only use big search tools for their own
results, they even support advertising practices of corporate search
tools since they use (need) them for their own (green) purposes. It is a
collaboration that serves both parties. Green search engines may be seen
as surfing on the capitalist wave towards more ecological technology.
However, their journey can be abruptly stopped at any time if big search
tools decide to opt out of green projects, as we have seen in the past.
‘Informational capitalism’[^32] is the captain steering the green ship
through the rough sea of online search after all.

### The Commons 

Aside from search engines with a centralized web index, there are
projects that try to provide decentralized search, following the
principle of file-sharing networks such as the PirateBay. The most
popular proponent of such decentralized search projects is the
peer-to-peer network YaCy, created by the German free software
enthusiast Michael Christen. While reading through the YaCy website, the
major goal and ideological ambition of the search engine jumps out at
you right away: ‘We want to achieve freedom of information through a
free, distributed web search which is powered by the world’s
users.’[^33] The image that is displayed in their ‘About Us’ section
clearly shows that the search engine characterizes itself as a true
alternative to centralized search engines such as Google or Bing and
their capitalist ideology:

![Fig. 1. YaCy homepage, about YaCy](images/mager_image1.png "Fig. 1. YaCy homepage, about YaCy")

Freedom and independence are put first. Rather than relying on big
search engines, YaCy provides users with the possibility to run a search
technology on their own computers and/or participate in a private
computer network that is not controlled by a single company or
individual. This basically means that there is no central index of the
web, such as Google’s. Rather, there is an index that each user builds
by searching the web through the YaCy Proxy (that one needs to install
first). This index is then shared with other peers in the network so
that a global index comes into being. Furthermore, a web crawler expands
the index, which has gained more and more importance over the last
years. When users do a global search, the index of all peers that are
currently online is searched.

This means that everyone can see how information is obtained by the
search engine and displayed to the user. YaCy is open-source, free
software that is completely transparent, as its website claims. No
collaboration with big search engines is needed.[^34] Quite on the
contrary, YaCy wants to make free content accessible through free
software so that users do not have to go through proprietary search
engines ‘in an increasingly monopolistic internet infrastructure because
then the monopoly holders decide what information is visible’.[^35]
Moreover, YaCy protects privacy since there is no central evaluation or
monitoring of search queries and helps to green the web because only
users’ computers are needed and no additional data centers with enormous
power consumption are required.

From an ideological standpoint YaCy may be interpreted as devoting
itself to ‘commons-based peer production’, a term coined by Yochai
Benkler. ‘The salient characteristic of commons, as opposed to property,
is that no single person has exclusive control over the use and
disposition of any particular resource in the commons.’[^36] Michael
Hardt even goes further by arguing that the commons are able to create
not only new goods, but also new humanity:

> Communism should be defined not only by the abolition of property but
> also by the affirmation of the common – the affirmation of open and
> autonomous production of subjectivity, social relations, and the forms
> of life; the self-governed continuous creation of new humanity.[^37]

The communist manifesto is not on the list of references that YaCy
provides on its website. It does, however, reference and support
manifestos by the Free Software Foundation Europe, the Chaos Computer
Club, the German Pirate Party, or the Charter of Civil Rights for a
Sustainable Knowledge Society. This alliance shows that the free
software movement and commons-based peer production are central pillars
of YaCy’s ideological framework. Following Hardt’s argumentation YaCy
may even be seen as closer to the communist spirit than to capitalist
ideology.

### Knowledge Engines

Finally, to round off the picture, knowledge engines are worth
mentioning in terms of alternative search projects. Knowledge engines
claim to provide users with new knowledge. Rather than pointing users to
information available already, they aim at providing users with new
answers to their questions. Wolfram|Alpha is well-known for this style
of search. Wolfram|Alpha is a search tool, or rather software, developed
by Stephen Wolfram, a British physicist and mathematician. Wolfram built
the software Mathematica, which integrates computer algebra, symbolic
and numerical computation, visualization, and statistics. Wolfram’s
profession tells us a lot about the ideological underpinning of his
software product. On its website, Wolfram|Alpha is described as a
scientific tool that provides answers to factual queries by computing
materials from external sources: ‘Our goal is to build on the
achievements of science and other systematizations of knowledge to
provide a single source that can be relied on by everyone for definitive
answers to factual queries.’[^38] Rather than offering users sources and
websites that may contain answers to their questions, Wolfram|Alpha
wants to provide users with straight answers in a scientific manner. The
software favors ‘expert-level knowledge’, facts, and figures and hence
clearly dedicates itself to the scientific paradigm. The attempt to
offer knowledge rather than information mirrors the idea of enlightening
citizens. In contrast to conventional search engines providing users
with heterogeneous, often contradictory information that needs to be
actively transformed into knowledge by the individual user,[^39]
WolframAlpha promotes reason and scientific thought and aims to provide
users with straight knowledge. Technically it contains a natural
language interpreter at the front-end and a number of key data sources,
which have been captured and standardized by Wolfram staff, at the
back-end (e.g. Wikipedia, Encyclop**æ**dia Britannica, or newspapers).

Another, yet more metaphysical knowledge engine is YossarianLives!. Its
algorithm uses metaphors to return image results that are conceptually
related to search terms. These results should enable users to see
problems in a new way rather than provide users with more of the same
information;[^40] they should further help to circumvent the filter
bubble.[^41] Even though YossarianLives! is constituted as a company, it
does not seem to have a proper business model yet. In contrast,
Wolfram|Alpha has developed a sophisticated business strategy.

Similar to Google, Wolfram|Alpha incorporated the capitalist ideology
into its scientific endeavor. Unlike big search, though, the company
does not only count on advertising. Besides its free, advertising-based
search tool, Wolfram|Alpha offers a Pro version that includes additional
features for a monthly subscription fee of \$5 and that does not display
advertising. It further makes money with sponsoring contracts and
licensing partnerships. This underlines the fact that Wolfram|Alpha is a
software product rather than a search tool. The Infoworld journalist
Neil McAllister argues that Wolfram|Alpha even goes beyond conventional
software companies in terms of copyright questions.[^42] When reading
through Wolfram|Alpha’s terms of use, one can see that the software does
not only claim ownership for the software itself, but also for its
output. This is the exact phrasing:

> In many cases the data you are shown never existed before in exactly
> that way until you asked for it, so its provenance traces back both to
> underlying data sources and to the algorithms and knowledge built into
> the Wolfram|Alpha computational system. As such, the results you get
> from Wolfram|Alpha are correctly attributed to Wolfram|Alpha
> itself.[^43]

Taking this seriously would mean that Wolfram|Alpha holds a copyright of
all users’ search queries. Moreover, open data are closed down when
being processed by the software that aims to ‘bring broad, deep,
expert-level knowledge to everyone’, as it claims on its homepage. This
crucially runs counter to the ideal of both free software and freedom of
information. In contrast to YaCy, Wolfram|Alpha contributes to closing
down web information that is freely available by simply processing it.
Serious trouble with copyright law may follow from this policy since
computers should not be entitled to credit for their calculations, as
the free software activist Richard Stallman argues.[^44]

##Conclusions

When considering alternative search projects in the limelight of
ideology, we can see that the capitalist spirit is by far not the only
ideology shaping contemporary search engines. Quite on the contrary,
there are multiple algorithmic ideologies at work. There are search
engines that carry democratic values, those that incorporate the green
ideology, some that believe in the commons, and others that subject
themselves to the scientific paradigm. This means that we can set an
ideological example by choosing one search engine over the other.

In daily practice, however, the capitalist ideology appears to be
hegemonic since not all ideologies are equal in terms of exercising
their power. The majority of users turns to big search engines and hence
solidifies the capitalist spirit more than any other ideology.[^45]
Moreover, most alternative search engines are subordinate to
‘informational capitalism’. DuckDuckGo and Ecosia both entered alliances
with big search engines by using their search results and advertising
methods. They assimilate the capitalist spirit by relying on big search
and its capital accumulation cycle. Their ideological agendas are not
deeply embedded in technical layers and algorithmic logics because both
the index and the algorithms they use are borrowed from other search
engines. Their ideology is only carried out on the surface; e.g. their
user interfaces, encryption techniques, and donation models. In
contrast, Wolfram|Alpha chose to be independent on an algorithmic level,
but ended up as a commercial product too. The only exception is YaCy.
The peer-to-peer network is the only search tool discussed in the
article that provides a true alternative to corporate search engines; it
is the most radical alternative to proprietary search and expresses its
values on the level of infrastructure, software, and content. YaCy’s
ideology is deeply woven into its technical Gestalt and computational
logics and hence embedded in actual practices. All other search tools
absorb the capitalist spirit.

This indicates that opting out of big search and its capitalist
underpinnings is not as easy as it may seem at first sight. Everyone is
free to choose alternatives, of course. But selecting a true
alternative, both in terms of technology and ideology, would require not
only awareness and a certain amount of technical know-how, but also
effort and patience. The latter has become a rare good in our fast
moving, comfortable consumer culture. Using YaCy to its full extent, for
example, requires installing YaCy first, accessing the global index, and
being patient in case the desired information does not appear
immediately. It probably also involves missing some pieces of
information other search engines would provide, for better or worse. The
network is only as good as its participants, after all. This indicates
that the farther you move away from big search engines towards smaller
ones, the more beautiful their technical and ideological Gestalt become.
Such a move however reveals that the beauty of search comes at a cost.
True alternatives can only be reached with a critical mass of users who
are willing to sacrifice bits of their convenience in return for a
search tool that is created and owned in the public domain.

Whether a peer-to-peer search engine like YaCy will ever be able to
compete with Google in regards to the scope and quality of its results
will ultimately depend on the number of users participating. But time
and money is needed too. Crawling and indexing the web has become a
time-consuming and very expensive undertaking that involves
sophisticated technology and highly skilled engineers. In the case of
centralized search, it further needs large data centers around the
globe. Big search engines such as Google possess years of experience
with handling big data, an enormously skilled workforce, and large-scale
infrastructure. Small search engines, such as the ones discussed in the
article, just started out with taming big data and the challenges that
come along with it. Whether they will succeed in providing a true
ideological alternative to corporate search tools such as Google will
depend on the human resources and funding they are able to acquire in
the end. Dirk Lewandowski suggests providing public funding to create a
public index of the web that would enable programmers to build various
search engines on top of it and, as a result, to achieve greater
diversity on the search engine market.[^46] Whatever the incentives and
specific actions will be to strengthen non-corporate search engines in
the future, this article has shown that there are still certain barriers
to be conquered on the road towards alternative search both in terms of
technology and ideology.

##Acknowledgements

The analysis of alternative search engines was conducted as part of the
research project “GLOCAL SEARCH. Search technology at the intersection
of global capitalism and local socio-political cultures” (funded by the
Jubiläumsfonds of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB), project
number 14702). I would like to thank the Society of the Query 2\#
conference participants and the editors of this volume for their helpful
comments and feedback.

##References {.references}

Allhutter, Doris and Roswitha Hoffmann. ‘Deconstructive Design as an
Approach for Opening Trading Zones’, in Jordi Vallverdú (ed.) *Thinking
Machines in the Philosophy of Computer Science: Concepts and
Principles*, Hershey: IGI Global, 2010, pp. 175-192.

Benkler, Yochai. *The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
Transforms Markets and Freedom*. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University
Press, 2006.

Boltanski, Luc and Ève Chiapello. *The New Spirit of Capitalism*,
London: Verso, 2007.

Čas, Johann. ‘Ubiquitous Computing, Privacy and Data Protection: Options
and Limitations to Reconcile the Unprecedented Contradictions’, in Serge
Gutwirth, Yves Poullet, Paul De Hert, Ronald Leenes (eds) *Computers,
Privacy and Data Protection: An Element of Choice*, Dordrecht,
Heidelberg, London, New York: Springer, 2011, pp. 139-171.

Castells, Manuel. *The Rise of the Network Society. The Information Age:
Economy, Society and Culture*, *Volume 1*, Malden: Blackwell, 2000.

DuckDuckGo, ‘Sources’, https://dukgo.com/help/en\_US/results/sources.

Eklöf, Jenny and Astrid Mager. ‘Technoscientific Promotion and Biofuel
Policy: How the Press and Search Engines Stage the Biofuel Controversy’,
*Media, Culture & Society* 35.4 (2013): 454-471*.*

Fuchs, Christian. ‘A Contribution to the Critique of the Political
Economy of Google’,

*Fast Capitalism* 8.1 (2011),
http://www.uta.edu/huma/agger/fastcapitalism/8\_1/fuchs8\_1.html

Haider, Jutta. ‘The Environment on Holidays or How a Recycling Bin
Informs Us on the Environment’, *Journal of Documentation* 67.5 (2011):
823-839.

Hardt, Michael. ‘Reclaim the Common in Communism’, *The Guardian*, 3
February 2011,
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/feb/03/communism-capitalism-socialism-property.

Hussain, Mobaruk. ‘The Market Share of Google in Various Countries’, SEO
Chief, 6 July 2010,
http://www.seo-chief.com/5950/the-market-share-of-google-in-various-countries.

Johnson, Nathania. ‘Google Says “No” to Ecocho’, Search Engine Watch, 23
April 2008,
http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2054343/Google-Says-No-to-Ecocho.

Latour, Bruno. ‘Technology Is Society Made Durable ‘, in John Law (ed.)
*A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology and Domination*,
New York and London: Routledge, 1991, pp. 103-131.

Mager, Astrid. ‘Algorithmic Ideology: How Capitalist Society Shapes
Search Engines’, *Information, Communication & Society* 15.5 (2012a):
1-19.

Mager, Astrid. ‘Search Engines Matter: From Educating Users Towards
Engaging with Online Health Information Practices’, *Policy & Internet*
4.2 (2012b): 1-21.

Marres, Noortje. ‘The Costs of Public Involvement: Everyday Devices of
Carbon Accounting and the Materialization of Participation’, *Economy
and Society*, 40.4 (2011): 510-533.

McAllister, Neil. ‘How Wolfram Alpha Could Change Software’, InfoWorld,
29 July 2009,
http://www.infoworld.com/d/developer-world/how-wolfram-alpha-could-change-software-248?page=0,0.

McGrath, Jack. ‘Google’s Green Initiative: Environmentally Conscious
Technology’, TechnoBuffalo, 18 May 2012,
http://www.technobuffalo.com/2011/05/18/googles-green-initiative-environmentally-conscious-technology.

Pasquinelli, Matteo. ‘Google’s PageRank Algorithm: a Diagram of
Cognitive Capitalism and the Rentier of the Common Intellect’, in Konrad
Becker and Felix Stalder (eds) *Deep Search: The Politics of Search
Engines Beyond Google*, Innsbruck: Studienverlag, 2009, pp. 152–162.

Peissl, Walter. ‘Information Privacy in Europe from a TA Perspective’,
in Serge Gutwirth, Yves Poullet and Paul De Hert (eds) *Data Protection
in a Profiled World,* Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London, New York: Springer,
2010, pp. 247-257.

Pennink, Frederiek. ‘Rethinking Search: YossarianLives!’, Institute of
Network Cultures, 16 May 2013,
http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/query/2013/05/16/rethinking-search-yossarianlives.

Slegg, Jennifer. ‘DuckDuckGo Sees Record Traffic After NSA Prism
Scandal’, Search Engine Watch, 18 June 2013,
http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2275867/DuckDuckGo-Sees-Record-Traffic-After-NSA-PRISM-Scandal.

Stallman, Richard. ‘Re: How Wolfram Alpha’s Copyright Claims Could
Change Software’, A2K Listserve, 4 August 2009,
http://lists.essential.org/pipermail/a2k/2009-August/004865.html.

Swaine, Jon. ‘Two Google Searches “Produce Same CO2 as Boiling a
Kettle”’, *The Telegraph*, 11 January 2009,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/google/4217055/Two-Google-searches-produce-same-CO2-as-boiling-a-kettle.html.

Thrift, Nigel. *Non-Representational Theory. Space, Politics, Affect*,
London: Routledge, 2008.

##Notes {.notes}

[^1]: For more information on accused collaborations between the NSA and
    IT companies leaked by Edward Snowden see, for example: Glenn
    Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, ‘NSA Prism Program Taps into User Data
    of Apple, Google and Others’, *The Guardian*, 6 June 2013,
    http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data.

[^2]: Bruno Latour, ‘Technology Is Society Made Durable’, in John Law
    (ed.) *A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology and
    Domination*, New York and London: Routledge, 1991, pp. 103-131.

[^3]: Astrid Mager, ‘Algorithmic Ideology: How Capitalist Society Shapes
    Search Engines’, *Information, Communication & Society* 15.5
    (2012a): pp. 1-19.

[^4]: Between October 2010 and February 2011 I conducted 17 expert
    interviews, both personally and via Skype. My interview partners
    included computer scientists, programmers, software developers, and
    people working in information retrieval (mainly from big, universal
    search engines). Furthermore, I talked to one search engine
    optimization expert, one economic journalist, one net activist, one
    jurist, and two policy-makers concerned with search technology, as
    well as multiple search engine scholars from the social sciences
    (all from the U.S. and Germany, one from Ireland). This research was
    supported by HUMlab, Umeå University (Sweden), where I worked as a
    post-doctoral fellow from 2010-2012.

[^5]: Luc Boltanski and Ève Chiapello, *The New Spirit of Capitalism*,
    London: Verso, 2007.

[^6]: Boltanski and Chiapello, *The New Spirit of Capitalism*.

[^7]: Boltanski and Chiapello, *The New Spirit of Capitalism*, p. 355
    (italics in original).

[^8]: Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘Google’s PageRank algorithm: a Diagram of
    Cognitive Capitalism and the Rentier of the Common Intellect’, in
    Konrad Becker and Felix Stalder (eds) *Deep Search: The Politics of
    Search Engines Beyond Google*, Innsbruck: Studienverlag, 2009, pp.
    152-162.

[^9]: Christian Fuchs, ‘A Contribution to the Critique of the Political
    Economy of Google’, *Fast Capitalism* 8.1 (2011),
    http://www.uta.edu/huma/agger/fastcapitalism/8\_1/fuchs8\_1.html.

[^10]: Jenny Eklöf and Astrid Mager, ‘Technoscientific Promotion and
    Biofuel Policy: How the Press and Search Engines Stage the Biofuel
    Controversy’, *Media, Culture & Society* 35.4 (2013): 454-471.

[^11]: Social search or social bookmarking techniques such as Delicious
    may also be seen as alternatives to big search. Since their search
    services are limited to a certain platform or user-generated indexes
    they will not be included in the analysis.

[^12]: See, https://duckduckgo.com/about.

[^13]: Doris Allhutter and Roswitha Hoffmann, ‘Deconstructive Design as
    an Approach for Opening Trading Zones’, in Jordi Vallverdú (ed.)
    *Thinking Machines in the Philosophy of Computer Science: Concepts
    and Principles*, Hershey: IGI Global, 2010, pp. 175-192.

[^14]: For a detailed discussion of privacy guidelines and regulations
    see, for example, Johann Čas, ‘Ubiquitous Computing, Privacy and
    Data Protection: Options and Limitations to Reconcile the
    Unprecedented Contradictions’, in Serge Gutwirth, Yves Poullet, Paul
    De Hert, Ronald Leenes (eds) *Computers, Privacy and Data
    Protection: An Element of Choice*, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London,
    New York: Springer, 2011, pp. 139-171.

[^15]: Walter Peissl, ‘Information Privacy in Europe from a TA
    Perspective’, Serge Gutwirth, Yves Poullet and Paul De Hert (eds.)
    *Data Protection in a Profiled World,* Dordrecht, Heidelberg,
    London, New York: Springer, 2010, pp. 247-257.

[^16]: Jennifer Slegg, ‘DuckDuckGo Sees Record Traffic After NSA Prism
    Scandal’, Search Engine Watch, 18 June 2013,
    http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2275867/DuckDuckGo-Sees-Record-Traffic-After-NSA-PRISM-Scandal.

[^17]: See, DuckDuckGo, ‘Sources’,
    https://dukgo.com/help/en\_US/results/sources.

[^18]: See also Dirk Lewandowski’s contribution in this volume.

[^19]: See, https://www.ixquick.com/eng/.

[^20]: See, http://metager.de/en/.

[^21]: See, http://www.ecosia.org/.

[^22]: Dirk Lewandowski’s contribution in this volume.

[^23]: Jon Swaine, ‘Two Google Searches “Produce Same CO2 as Boiling a
    Kettle”’, *The Telegraph*, 11 January 2009,
    http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/google/4217055/Two-Google-searches-produce-same-CO2-as-boiling-a-kettle.html.

[^24]: In 2010 Google launched its green initiative with the main
    purpose of cutting down its environmental impact (e.g. by reducing
    their data center energy use) and investing in environmentally
    conscious technology. Jack McGrath, ‘Google’s Green Initiative:
    Environmentally Conscious Technology’, TechnoBuffalo, 18 May 20122,
    http://www.technobuffalo.com/2011/05/18/googles-green-initiative-environmentally-conscious-technology.

[^25]: See, http://www.greenplanetsearch.com.

[^26]: Jutta Haider, ‘The Environment on Holidays or How a Recycling Bin
    Informs Us on the Environment’, *Journal of Documentation* 67.5
    (2011): 823-839.

[^27]: Noortje Marres, ‘The Costs of Public Involvement: Everyday
    Devices of Carbon Accounting and the Materialization of
    Participation’, *Economy and Society* 40.4 (2011): 515.

[^28]: Nigel Thrift, *Non-Representational Theory. Space, Politics,
    Affect*, London: Routledge, 2008.

[^29]: Marres, ‘The Costs of Public Involvement’.

[^30]: See, http://us.znout.org/.

[^31]: Nathania Johnson, ‘Google Says “No” to Ecocho’, Search Engine
    Watch, 23 April 2008,
    http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2054343/Google-Says-No-to-Ecocho.

[^32]: Manuel Castells, *The Rise of the Network Society. The
    Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture, Volume 1*, Malden:
    Blackwell, 2000.

[^33]: See, http://yacy.net/en/index.html.

[^34]: In contrast to the peer-to-peer search project Seeks, which aims
    to be a free software/ open source project, but uses commercial
    search engines to generate its index too:
    http://www.seeks-project.info.

[^35]: YaCy, ‘Philosophy’, http://yacy.net/en/Philosophy.html.

[^36]: Yochai Benkler, *The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
    Transforms Markets and Freedom,* New Haven, Connecticut: Yale
    University Press, 2006, p. 61.

[^37]: Michael Hardt, ‘Reclaim the Common in Communism’, *The Guardian*,
    3 February 2011,
    http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/feb/03/communism-capitalism-socialism-property.

[^38]: See, http://www.wolframalpha.com/about.html.

[^39]: 39 Astrid Mager, ‘Search Engines Matter: From Educating Users
    Towards Engaging with Online Health Information Practices’, *Policy
    & Internet* 4.2 (2012b): pp. 1-21.

[^40]: See, http://about.yossarianlives.com/index.html.

[^41]: Frederiek Pennink, ‘Rethinking Search: YossarianLives!’,
    Institute of Network Cultures, 16 May 2013,
    http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/query/2013/05/16/rethinking-search-yossarianlives.

[^42]: Neil McAllister, ‘How Wolfram Alpha Could Change Software’,
    InfoWorld, 29 July 2009,
    http://www.infoworld.com/d/developer-world/how-wolfram-alpha-could-change-software-248?page=0,0.

[^43]: See, http://www.wolframalpha.com/termsofuse/.

[^44]: Richard Stallman, ‘Re: How Wolfram Alpha’s Copyright Claims Could
    Change Software’, A2K Listserve, 4 August 2009,
    http://lists.essential.org/pipermail/a2k/2009-August/004865.html.

[^45]: Google has a market share of more than 90 percent in most
    European countries according to the website SEO Chief: Mobaruk
    Hussain, ‘The Market Share of Google in Various Countries’, SEO
    Chief, 6 July 2010,
    http://www.seo-chief.com/5950/the-market-share-of-google-in-various-countries.

[^46]: See Dirk Lewandowski’s contribution in this volume.