---
title: "The Dark Side of Google: Pre-Afterword – Social Media Times"
author: Ippolita
---

The following text is the new foreword to the translation by Patrice Riemens of Ippolita's *The Dark Side of Google*, Amsterdam: Instititute of Network Cultures, 2013.**

##Performance Societies in the Clouds

Many years have passed since Ippolita first addressed the need to
distinguish between the Free Software movement and the Open Source
movement.[^1] Although both movements are associated
with a certain ‘freedom’, the ‘freedom’ proposed by the Free Software
movement is very different in nature from the one proposed by the Open
Source movement. The former is more ideological, whereas the latter
focuses on defining the best way of promoting a product in an open
manner. In other words, it completely follows a market logic. The Open
Source movement has adopted the playful attitude of hacker peer sharing
and uses it in a profit-oriented logic of work and exploitation. In so
doing the movement has neutralized peer sharing's originally
revolutionary potential.

The subsequent analysis will show that Google, which is a hegemonic
attempt to organize ‘all the world’s information’, progressed in a
similar fashion. This argument will address how the logic of open
source, in combination with the Californian philosophy of academic
excellence found in Google’s motto ‘Don’t be evil’, is merely an excuse
to place itself under the banner of capitalist abundance,
turbo-capitalism’s illusion of unlimited growth and extremist
anarcho-capitalism. Google sells the myth that *more, bigger, and
faster*always equates with *better*and that the ‘I’m feeling lucky
button’ will immediately and effortlessly satisfy all our desires with a
simple click of the mouse. In other words, the company creates the
comfortable illusion that you will be taken care of if you create a
Google account, that there's nothing else you need.

Unfortunately, claims about informational totalitarianism are not as
ridiculous as they may sound. Although it has been established many
times that there is nothing *more*to produce and, more importantly, that
unlimited growth is a chimera (even in the digital world), run-ups to
the next useless and shiny gadget continue to appear. Our weary world
could use the blow that comes with the uncomfortable acknowledgement of
limited growth. We must start looking around, looking at each other, and
exchanging what we need. We must imagine and build something meaningful
together.

We also need to understand that IT is not merely a technique to manage
information in an automatic way. IT is increasingly seen as a panacea
for solving social problems (from delinquency to the crisis of
traditional politics). In fact, *automation*easily degenerates with this
delegation, sliding very quickly from a technical register to a social
register. Instead of offering precise tools to solve specific problems,
automation becomes a universal medicine that presents itself as working
regardless of human intervention and will. However, society and
sociability, such as politics and power management, are not problems to
be solved once and for all: they are constitutive elements to face and
deal with as part of a meaningful existence. Yet this shift from the
utilitarian to the social occurs because IT’s inherent logic,
cybernetics, is based on a system of retroactive adjustments: the
effects generated by the adoption of a particular technological tool
directly influence the very perception of the surrounding environment –
physical, social, psychological. The cybernetic IT systems continuously
reshape their very foundations by being transformed into ideology, which
is actually an output of these technological
beginnings.[^2] To illustrate this, think of how Google
uses this recursive logic as an extraordinary machine, constituted
through its own use by users. In this sense IT can be seen as an
‘autopoietic’ complex of machines that accumulate all the basic
information entered on the web by millions of users every day. And it is
not only Google that applies this recursive logic; Facebook, Amazon, and
Apple also exploit these same processes.

When these ‘mega machines’ – consisting of a datacenter and the very
best coders – had only just started to emerge, after being safely locked
up by a NDA (Non-Disclosure Agreement), one of the first problems they
encountered was that they had to be filled with something. The content
did not matter much, as long as the costs remained low and, if possible,
free. A new and relatively cheap type of industrial production was born,
yet the question had become, how could these databases actually return
fabulous profits for their owners?

By this time the net had emerged. Slowly, broadband connections were
becoming less asymmetrical (mainly due to investments and the incentive
to connect and bridge the digital divide, which meant a loss of the
public sector), rates were down (although remaining unjustifiably high),
and the upload capacity had significantly increased. Consequently, it
was at this point in time that the solution to the mega-machines'
problems was revealed: the data centers could be filled by pouring into
them the online contents of users – all of the data they had assembled
via their computers, smartphones, and cameras. This solution meant that
the ‘free market’ was introduced: everyone would finally be able to
publish! This development led to the birth of a new myth: the false
promise of unlimited growth in the Era of User Generated Content. The
ideology of this era proposes that the margins are huge, that the
process of the ‘webification and cloudification of everything’ has only
just started, and that its prospects are fabulous. The ‘cloud’ of cloud
computing can increase by many orders of magnitude.

As a result, what we now face is one of the most effective Weapons of
Democratic DistrAttention that has ever been developed: the
administering of gratification for users who cannot wait to post, tag,
comment, and link, not only to their own photos, videos, tweets, and
texts, but also to those of their friends in the great *mare nostrum* of
social networks. However, what is often forgotten is that this sea is
actually not at all *nostrum* (‘ours’), since it is almost always
someone else’s space, whether that of Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, or the
next digital aquarium to entertain and nurture net-fish. We are happy as
long as we possess the latest expensive tool for self-denunciation and
as long as we can always be online and connected. Soon we will all make
our purchases with some ‘smart-stuff’ – thereby forgetting credit cards
– because we always want to know what we are interested in, what we
like, what we think, where we are, what we do and with whom. And since
the devices are getting smaller and less capacious, it is easy to
predict that an explosion of the storage of online personal data will
soon take place.

##From the File to the Cloud

>If we want things to stay as they are, things will have to change.
>Tomasi di Lamedusa [^3]

Today web applications are able to replace almost all software created
for the computer. The very idea of a personal computer has ceased to
exist now that everyone is able to have his or her own personal web
space. Ten years ago users were still struggling to understand how to
manage file systems. Today, users are completely unaware that they are
under the thumb of the dispersion of their online content.

Hardware devices now almost exclusively serve to provide access to the
web and its services. As users we do not ‘own’ anything, because
everything is shared with the large corporations that provide us with
services free of charge. For the common user, the computer as a physical
entity has faded into the impalpability of cloud computing*.*Like
Olympic gods, the informatics of domination that rule our lives stay in
the clouds. This ‘evolution’ reflects a precise technical and economic
goal, namely, that the web must become the main environment for IT
development. Key elements of this evolution are cloud computing*,*the
smartphone, tablet, e-reader (or mobile devices in general), browsers,
HTML5, and social networks.

One of the most interesting innovations associated with mobile devices
and the web in general is the disappearance of the concept of files and
file systems. On desktop systems we have grown accustomed to working
with folder and files. Our documents are files, images are files, and
all of these files are organized in folders. Often the links between
different types of files and applications are very clear: a word
processor creates, displays, or edits textual files, while an image
viewer handles image files.

However, for mobile devices with access to content on the web, this
organization into files and folders is close to meaningless. Instead of
files and folder, these devices speak of services or features. This
development is undoubtedly interesting and not devoid of a dark side.
What happened to music files is perhaps most evocative. In a desktop
environment – before the birth of applications such as iTunes – audio
files (often with confusing names) were typically placed in folders or
collected in a playlist. Music programs read these audio files or
playlists and so allowed us to listen to the music. However with the
birth of programs (capable of self-generating playlists and music
libraries, and of categorizing audio files into virtual folders,
collecting them by author, year, and album), the ‘file’ for music has
disappeared. Once uploaded on the device, music ceases to exist as a
file (for the user at least) and ends up inside the mysterious cloud of
music libraries from programs such as iTunes.

The next step was the online audio library, from which it is no longer
necessary to download audio files through P2P networks (thereby avoiding
‘cybercrime’), because applications now offer us everything we want to
listen to directly on the internet. Libraries and their content are all
available without many limits, so there is no need anymore for files
that are actually stored and cataloged on your device. Examples of
these online audio libraries are Spotify and Grooveshark.

This loss of ‘stored’ files in online audio libraries also extends to
other types of files. Pictures and videos are immediately uploaded onto
social platforms, and textual documents are stored in office suites and
made accessible online by different services for which you no longer
have to install any programs. The cloud offers services, space, sync,
the myth of the 99.99 percent uptime – basically everything that our
devices cannot ‘physically’ have, unlimited and almost always for free.

Cloud computing is trivialized in a series of buzzwords, such as SaaS
(Software as a Service), DaaS (Data as a Service) and so on. The cloud
has in fact become the very virtualization of a ‘feature’ offered as an
online service. Everything is up and running somewhere in the clouds of
the web, ready to be used. Everything changes so that nothing changes.
While the way in which we make use of data has changed drastically
(think of the amount of data we handle, its quality, and the devices we
use to access big data), the main managers of these clouds are still the
usual suspects: Google first and foremost, and also Amazon.

However, besides making use of cloud computing*,*Google has also entered
competition with mobile devices. The advent of smartphones and tablets
with internet access has revolutionized the mobile market, and it gave
birth to a new mass ritual, namely, ‘Connectivity Everywhere’, and the
mantra ‘Always On!’ The smartphone has become a status symbol to the
point of unleashing wars for the hegemony of the market. Together with
iOS, Google’s Android has emerged as one of the major competitors.

Android is an operating system built on a Linux kernel and distributed
under the open source Apache license. Note how we use ‘open’ and not
‘free’, because the Free Software Foundation GNU’s components and
libraries used by GNU/Linux OSs have actually been replaced by BSD-based
ones. Android has been chosen by several hardware manufacturers and is
therefore available on different models that often compete with each
other. It could thus be argued that Android has become a *de
facto*standard, in a similar way to how the Windows operating system for
desktop became a standard. The only basic difference is that, thanks to
the open source license, manufacturers can create custom flavors of
Android for their hardware. Along with the Android operating system –
and in addition to having acquired the manufacturer Motorola – another
important element of Google’s entrance in the mobile market is its own
specific smartphone, the Nexus. In contrast to Android, iOS forms a
proprietary and closed operating system, specifically designed by Apple
for its mobile products, iPhone, iPad, and iPod.

Besides numerous and frequent legal battles over patents, the scenario
in the mobile market is further complicated by the joint venture
Nokia-Microsoft with Windows Mobile, and also by the former leader of
the mobile market RIM, which continues to plod along with Blackberry.
One of the most representative examples of a gigantic, Asiatic
corporative capitalist is the aggressive Samsung. This Korean company
has begun the most profitable electronic conglomerate in the world,
which in large part can be attributed to their tablet and smartphones
using Android. Finally, Chinese players such as ZTE and Huawei are also
gaining a foothold in the war for hegemony of the mobile market.

Bearing in mind the strong competition that surrounds the mobile market,
it is easy to understand the browser instrument's importance as an
environment for development. Google released the first version of its
Chrome browser in 2008 and was early enough to catch the trend that
would soon become dominant: web services. Once again, Google found
itself in the lead position.

Unlike Mozilla Firefox, whose innovations are for a large part linked to
the methodological structure of work and cultural heritage of open
source, Chrome contains only technical innovations. As sons of
Californian turbo-capitalism, Page and Brin staked everything on speed.
The result with Chrome is a phenomenal JavaScript engine and the
division of each web page loaded as a single running process. In
contrast to other web languages, JavaScript describes the ‘logic’ of
sites and applications. The better its performance, the greater the
speed of execution of the service we are using.

##HTML5, W3C: Standards, Architectural Dominance, and Control Methods

In the highly complex world that is the internet, some elements need to
be shared in as universal a manner as possible. In order to make
computer processes communicable, common rules, conventions, and
alphabets are necessary. This is why standards have been established
over the course of years. Think of the HTTP protocol born at the end of
the 80s, which enabled machines and humans to access the web. Without
HTTP, the World Wide Web would not exist and – although many are eager
to innovate – no one has the slightest intention of changing it. Not
even the nerd supremacists of Silicon Valley, who are on the payroll of
the most visionary anarcho-capitalists.

This is in sharp contrast to the changes that have been made in HTML
(essential for web pages) and which have become ground for some of the
most important battles for architectural dominance the computer world
has ever fought (but not won). The evolution of HTML is managed, along
with other basic standards, by the W3 Consortium, one of the
supranational institutions responsible for making suggestions and
recommendations on what the web should be.

The W3C tasks are organized into different working groups. Each group
makes drafts of specifications and recommendations for each individual
project. To become a recommendation, a draft must have at least two
independent implementations (meaning no code is shared) that are
meaningful, fully functional, and already used by a considerable number
of users. It therefore depends for a large part on Google whether HTML5
or other specific recommendations become W3C standard. However, it
should be noted that Google develops its Chrome browsers on the same
WebKit rendering engine that is used by Safari, Apple’s proprietary
browser. Google is also the main funder of the Mozilla Software
Foundation, which develops Firefox, based on the Gecko rendering engine.
Now that the Opera browser has switched to WebKit, Gecko-Mozilla remains
the only alternative, together with Microsoft’s Internet Explorer, to
implement new standards.

This quick rise behind the scenes of the web is a brief example of what
Ippolita means by analyzing the technocratic systems on which the
informatics of domination are based. From the moment that (mobile)
devices began multiplying, laptops have been emptied of software and
data, and now that the craze of everything ‘social’ has exploded, it is
easy to understand how browsers and HTML are of primary importance for
building a worldwide computing hegemony – both from an economic and
political point of view.

##Open Is Not Free, and Published Is Not Public

And here we are today. Unlike the times in which Ippolita was one of the
few shouting about how we don’t have to put everything on Google –
because the delegation of our data and trust (even if semi-unconscious)
marks the beginning of domination (in this case, technocratic) – today
many voices have been raised against the social networks and the whole
Web 2.0 tale, accusing them of violating the privacy of
users.[^4]

The techno-enthusiasm is dismissed as a false revolutionary ideology,
because however social the internet as a movement may appear, this is
overshadowed by its elitism: how contradictory and fideistic!
Commentators such as danah boyd point out that Facebook in particular is
a project based on the ideology of *radical transparency,*because it is
in its nature to strive for publishing everything
indiscriminately.[^5] It should not be forgotten,
however, that Facebook’s first venture capital financier, who came from
the Paypal mafia, was intertwined with military and civilian
intelligence services, offering political support to U.S. right-wing
libertarians (e.g. people who believed Bush Sr. to be a ‘moderate’). As
Tom Hodgkinson already commented in *The Guardian,* these are people who
define themselves as ‘anarcho-capitalists’.[^6] Umair
Haque even dares to notice, from the privileged surroundings of Harvard,
that perhaps the ‘bubble’ of social media also exists from an economic
point of view: so far no one has shown that social media have
contributed to selling customized products through personal
advertising.[^7] In the meantime, various scholars have
accomplished more extensive pieces of analysis and criticism. We
remember Siva Vaidhyanathan's thorough *The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should Worry)*.[^8] Evgeny Morozov’s *To Save
Everything, Click Here*has rightly focused the debate on solutionism and
internet-centrism, fideistic acceptances of the so-called inevitable
‘technological revolutions’ taking place.[^9] These
attitudes described by Morozov claim to be scientific and objective, but
instead are highly ideological, endemically spreading now in too many
private and public speeches. But Morozov lacks a broader theoretical
discourse on power, based on the practices of technocratic delegation
that users perform in everyday life.

Beyond both concrete and rather unrealistic proposals for fighting this
social media bubble (e.g. mass ‘suicide’ on Facebook, the failed
Diaspora project to rebuild a social network for free, complaints and
petitions to various authority figures and guarantors who are unable to
even supervise themselves), it is actually someone such as the
techno-enthusiast Jeff Jarvis who puts his finger on the problem: the
public. Similar to how ‘opening code’ does not equate to ‘making it
free’, ‘publishing content’ does not equate to ‘making it public’. On
the contrary, with Facebook (although G+ or other social platforms work
in the same way) it becomes clear that things actually work in the
opposite way. Everything that is posted becomes the non-exclusive
property of the company and can be resold to third parties, as can be
(re)read in the TOS (Terms of Service). In the clouds of social
networks, then, publishing does not mean public. For almost all web 2.0
applications, publishing means ‘private’ – a corporation or a private
company owns the content. Every time we access our online profiles (our
digital alter egos), we work for these corporations for free. By serving
us with increasingly invasive and targeted advertisements, the sites'
algorithms try to make money on our backs – on our digital bodies.

Ippolita’s harsh concerns about Google’s totalizing ambitions seem all
the more urgent when we consider the case of Facebook. Yesterday’s
champion in ‘invasiveness’, Google, almost pales in comparison to the
champion of social control today. The way that Gmail uses advertising,
the power of geolocation in Google Maps, the successes of Chrome as a
browser and of the Android OS, or even the most controversial projects,
such as Google Books, which has stunned the entire publishing market,
seem almost harmless when compared to the capacity of Facebook to expand
a consensual method of social control. After all, Google is an
Enlightenment dream; a dream of global knowledge characterized
politically more by liberal than conservative tendencies. Facebook, on
the other hand, which we expect to deliver consistently despite a lot of
interplanetary gossip, has a political connotation that is clearly
reactionary. Facebook works because more than a billion people are on
it, an incredible power, but to do what? We still don't really know.
(Ippolita wrote extensively about Facebook in *Nell’acquario di Facebook*,
to be translated and published in English as *In the Facebook Aquarium*.)
[^10]

Of course we should not forget that networks have played an important
role in the 2008 revolt in Iran and in the uprisings of most countries
in North Africa, as well as in Asian dictatorships and the Arab world in
general. Facebook has been very helpful for the Indignados, and Twitter
and Foursquare for Occupy Wall Street. These and other private
instruments will probably be used again in revolts for freedom that are
yet to come, and we hope that these will be more and more numerous.
However, this is not a good reason to link social networks to democracy,
freedom, and equality. Social networks do not make revolutions – it is
people who make them. As the controversial WikiLeaks and Anonymous cases
have clearly shown, if they want, governments and established powers may
stifle any initiative branded as subversive, especially when it comes to
matters of direct action that strongly depend on digital technologies.

Social networks are not necessarily free, autonomous, and self-managed.
We use them and create them to try to expand the possibilities of
autonomy, but we cannot truly think that for-profit companies provide
free of charge tools to access a world of freedom and equality. The use
of technologies depends on the people. In itself, no technology
guarantees anything. The methodological approach that we have practiced
so far suggests that we should evaluate not the ‘what’ but the ‘how’ –
that is, the way in which technological tools are created and modified
through use and the methods by which individuals and groups adapt and
change their behavior. It seems clear, then, that the same reasoning
applies to social networks as to any other social value: the necessary
consistency between means and ends. We are facing an anthropo-technical
turning point.

The situation is critical. However, this story is not a new one, and we
are not at a hazardous point in this situation. While following
discussions on any technological buzz, from the iPhone to iPad, Android
to Windows 8, Facebook to Twitter, we have to laugh at the ingenuity of
gurus, enthusiasts, and ordinary users – a bitter laugh, from Italy. In
this country it has always been clear that it will not be the so-called
democratic institutions that will guarantee our rights. Nor will it be
the machines of this or that multinational company with the consecrated
status of Goodness and Progress for All that will give us, free of
charge, a world of freedoms. Italy continues to be the political
laboratory of the future; it is the only Mediterranean country in the
G8. Here in Italy, a movement that started online on a private blog has
won a quarter of the electorate in 2013, and it now proposes itself as a
force for renewal, much in line with the new digital movements whose
major vocation is claiming to represent the 99 percent (Indignados,
Occupy Wall Street, Pirates). Politics are already a technocracy, and
proposals for technological democracy, web 2.0, or what have you, are
increasingly enmeshed within this technocracy. Who creates and manages
these tools of democracy? Are they the nerd supremacists on the payroll
of anarcho-capitalists? How can repentant soldiers, technocratic geeks,
or whistleblowers constantly on the run inspire the struggle for
freedom? The sad stories of oppression suffered by Manning, Assange,
Snowden, and many others, otherwise similar, are only the first chapters
in a saga that promises to be detrimental to civil liberties. The
technical skills and the geeks’ enthusiasm by themselves are not enough
to ‘do the right thing’, because deliberation, morality, and aesthetics
are not technical matters: the better algorithms will not automagically
create better societies, and radical transparency is a totalitarian
nightmare.

##Participation Myth Corollaries: We Are the 99 Percent

Digital activism could be framed as an interesting corollary to the
online mass participation myth, and the claim that 'social networks
fueled revolutions' is part of that same narrative. Of course people use
what is available to them to communicate, and Facebook, Twitter, and
Foursquare have been very important tools for movements as diverse as
the Arab Springs (Egypt above all), the Indignados (Spain), and Occupy
Wall Street (U.S. and elsewhere). However, we would like to emphasize an
aspect of these movements that relies more on ancient rituals than on
the ‘digital networks connected us’ rhetoric.

Ippolita shares the idea that

>[s]ocial media have been chiefly responsible for the construction of a
*choreography of assembly* as a process of symbolic construction of
public space which facilitates and guides the physical *assembling* of a
highly dispersed and individualized constituency.[^11]

The key question is how these media were used to ‘get physical’. How, in
the modern theater of the social internet, do various technical layers
contribute to social performance? How do so-called leaderless movements
distribute power by channeling individual emotions in a collective
emotional choreography? These self-named leaderless movements hide the
importance of organization and have increasingly become emotional
management. However, the true leaders of social networks are the
technical managers, because they can control the information flow.
Technocracy is here. The choice for a specific communication platform is
not neutral either. The main communication platform of the
aforementioned Italian ‘Five Star Movement’ is hosted on the private,
individual blog Beppegrillo.it. Technical procedures to be posted and
shared are the key to power articulation in these kinds of digital
movements, as was shown by the insistence of the German Pirate movement
on Liquid Feedback**tools of interaction.

We are certainly not the only ones to proclaim the notion that ‘what is
true today, was true yesterday’. You must be able to imagine your future
in order to understand the present. We need to be more contemporary to
our times, that is to say *untimely*, or in the words of Agamben,
‘contemporary is the one whose eyes are struck by the beam of darkness that comes from his own time’.[^12] By recalling the past
and creating a collective story (since memory is a collective tool),
nothing is ever repeated. However, the differences are similar, and the
insipid soup of yesterday, a little pimped up, may be dished out as the
radical innovation of tomorrow.

For this reason, we leave intact the escape routes identified in *The
Dark Side of Google*.[^13] Although things have
changed, we want to remind ourselves about what has happened. For
example, the logic of the trusted network that we identified in FOAF
(Friend of a Friend) was realized in a different manner and eventually
publicized by Facebook. Indymedia has run its course, and the dreams of
digital democracy are embodied in new movements. If what we ‘imagine’ is
reflected by the advertising on TV or on other devices, or by the
‘freedom of choice’ for hundreds of thousands of apps for iPhone, or by
the possibility of having more than a thousand ‘friends’ on Facebook,
then maybe we have insisted too little on the need to desire and imagine
something better. Yet alternatives to Google already exist; think of
self-managed servers like Autistici/Inventati, Riseup, or Lorea. Of
course, they are not *free as in beer,*but they are *free as in
freedom.*Treading the never-ending paths of freedom may cost a lot, but
at least you have a choice, and it allows you to undertake what you
desire.

So far we have described what Donna Haraway calls the ‘informatics of
domination’.[^14] The method that has been built
(cartographic, interdisciplinary) is necessarily partial and sometimes
lax, but at the same time it has allowed for problems with the
technocratic delegation to emerge, long before it became obvious.
Jamaican slaves used the saying, ‘pull a straight lick with a crooked
stick’. We like to imagine escape routes, then try to sell them; we
imagine and build appropriate tools to achieve our desires. We should
make them available to an audience that is made up of people, instead of
publishing them through the depraved megaphone of an intrusive
corporation’s wall. It is as McLuhan already claimed: ‘the medium is the
message’.

Many of us are in the same situation; we are not cooperating since we
don’t want to participate in the crowdsourcing of the masses of social
media. Social networking services have the compulsive urge to touch up
your profile in such a way that it will stand out from the others.
However, these ‘touch ups’ are not real differences; they are only
slight variations within predefined categories (single? married?
friend?). This has resulted in the formation of groups who are friends
because they say that they like the same thing. In other words, it has
resulted in a homophile self-imposition. Diversity appears in the
approval of tastes and behaviors. Even so, as Lucius T. Outlaw
enlightens us in *On Race and Philosophy,* human biodiversity, as races
and ethnicities, is a valuable difference.[^15] We
carry on in step and apply this difference, following Braidotti and
Haraway, to the entire human-tech machinic
systems.[^16] The more differences there are, the more
valuable the system will be. If genetic variability is a value, so
should be the variability of the code. The value of difference is not a
principle quantity. More does not mean better, and more objects or
friends does not mean greater freedom of choice.

We note that in analyses of networks (including social networks),
terminology is usually heavily militarized. However, if we return to the
‘material’ in a more narrow sense, it should be noted that computers
themselves are constructed with semi-conductor minerals, which are
extracted from areas that are in constant conflict over those minerals
(e.g. Congo), for that very reason. Globalization of goods is mainly the
globalization of exploitation. We should not look away from the fact
that our cool and ergonomic tools are produced by masses of Asian
workers, especially Chinese, who are forced to declare in their
contracts that they will not commit suicide at the factories they work
at. Thanks, guys! The global market digests all differences. Meanwhile,
when we are purchasing the latest technological nonsense, we can perhaps
gloat over how some skimpy tree was planted to offset emissions of CO2.
Green capitalism, however, remains as mad as any productivist ideology.
No one is pure, and we are all involved.

However, despite being immersed in this technological world, we should
try to keep a distance from it and defamiliarize ourselves in order to
write some kind of ethnography of social media. This should not focus on
how social media work (there are enough how-to's and manuals on that
already), but on the reasons why we are in this situation, and how we
can influence it by injecting diversity, chaos, and germs of autonomy.
We are compromised and involved, but this does not mean we have to
accept everything uncritically. If we start from the collective
findings, we can derive individual conclusions in a process of
estrangement that proceeds from the inside out (rather than from the
unfamiliar to the familiar, as happens in classical ethnographic
observations). We are the savages, and we need a decidedly subjective
look. We do not need the supposed objectivity of an outside observer.

Fortunately, the myth of scientific objectivity survives only in the
inferior and vulgate. It has been more than a century since the hard
sciences have taken the path of relativism, and it is time now that the
‘human sciences’ should follow them. We need radical relativism in order
to observe our habits and behavior from the outside and to understand
what we are doing. We have to make our actions concrete, and we have to
be able to communicate them effectively in a public space, a space that
must be preserved, renegotiated, and built relentlessly. In order to
stop officiating at the rite of the mass of dominant technologies, we
need to build new and conscious social rituals.

This is the whole problem then: the foundation of power and its
transformation into domination. How do you create a device capable of
not succumbing to the power of the sacred? There is a reversal of the
sacred: the profane, the iconoclastic moment of carnival. Once you have
built your little Olympus, you must renew it by following the correct
rhythm. The autopoiesis processes we foster are the embodiment of this
sense of continuous renewal.

Do you have any ideas? We have a few, so let us know!

Ippolita.net

info@ippolita.net

September, 2013

*Per una corretta autopoiesi (For a proper autopoiesis)*

Download *The Dark Side of Google* for free from http://networkcultures.org/publications.

##References {.references}

Agamben, Giorgio. 'What Is the Contemporary', in *What is an Apparatus?
and Other Essays,* Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2009, pp. 39-56.

boyd, danah. ‘Facebook and Radical Transparency: A Rant’, 14 May 2011,
http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2010/05/14/facebook-and-radical-transparency-a-rant.html.

Braidotti, Rosi. Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of
Becoming, Cambridge: Polity Press 2002.

Gerbaudo, Paolo. *Tweets and the Streets*, London: Pluto Press, 2012.

Haraway, Donna. ‘A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and
Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century’, in Donna Haraway,
*Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature*, New York:
Routledge, 1991, pp. 149-181.

Hodkinson, Tom. 'With Friends Like These', *The Guardian*, 14 and 16
February 2008,

http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/jan/14/facebook.

Ippolita. *The Dark Side of Google,* Amsterdam: Institute of Network
Cultures, 2013 (2007).

\_\_\_\_\_, *Nell’acquario di Facebook*, Milano: Ledizioni, 2012.

\_\_\_\_\_, *Open Non è Free: Comunità Digitali tra Etica Hacker e
Mercato Global,*Milano: Elèuthera, 2005.

Lampedusa, Giuseppe Tomasi di. *Il Gattopardo*, trans. Archibald
Colquihoun, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Everyman's Library, 1998.

Maturana, Humberto R. and Francisco J. Varela. *Autopoiesis and
Cognition: The Realization of the Living,*Boston Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, Vol. 42, Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company,
1980.

Morozov, Evgeny. *To Save Everything, Click Here,*New York: Public
Affairs, 2013.

Outlaw Jr., Lucius T. *On Race and Philosophy*, New York: Routledge,
1996.

Slade, Giles. *The Big Disconnect: The Story of Technology and
Loneliness*, New York: Prometheus Book, 2012.

Vaidhyanathan, Siva. *The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should
Worry),* Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011.

##Notes {.notes}

[^1]: Ippolita, *Open Non è Free: Comunità Digitali tra Etica Hacker e
    Mercato Global*, Milano: Elèuthera, 2005.

[^2]: This description is a very brief summary of Humberto R. Maturana and
    Francisco J. Varela's idea of autopoiesis (from *Autopoiesis and
    Cognition: The Realization of the Living,*Boston Studies in the
    Philosophy of Science, Vol. 42, Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing
    Company, 1980). Here, we can imagine the 'internet' like a 'living
    organism' in Maturana's terms.

[^3]: Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, *Il Gattopardo*, trans. Archibald
    Colquihoun, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Everyman's Library, 1998, p.
    22.

[^4]: Giles Slade, *The Big Disconnect: The Story of Technology and
    Loneliness*, New York, Prometheus Book, 2012. See chapter three in
    *The Dark Side of Google*: 'Trusting Machines'.

[^5]: danah boyd, ‘Facebook and Radical Transparency: A Rant’, 14 May
    2011,
    http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2010/05/14/facebook-and-radical-transparency-a-rant.html.

[^6]: Tom Hodkinson, 'With Friends Like These', *The Guardian*, 14 and 16
    February 2008,

    http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/jan/14/facebook.

[^7]: Umair Haque, 'The Social Media Bubble', Harvard Business Review
    blog, 23 March 2010,
    http://blogs.hbr.org/2010/03/the-social-media-bubble/.

[^8]: Siva Vaidhyanathan, *The Googlization of Everything (And Why We
    Should Worry),* Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011.

[^9]: Evgeny Morozov, *To Save Everything, Click Here,*New York: Public
    Affairs, 2013.

[^10]: Ippolita, *Nell’acquario di Facebook*, Milano: Ledizioni, 2012.
    Spanish translation: *En el acuario de Facebook*, Madrid: Enclave de
    Libros, 2012. French translation: *J'aime pas Facebook*, Paris:
    Payot & Rivages, 2012.

[^11]: Paolo Gerbaudo, *Tweets and the Streets*, London: Pluto Press, 2012.

[^12]: Giorgio Agamben, 'What Is the Contemporary', in *What Is an
    Apparatus? And Other Essays,* Stanford: Stanford University Press,
    2009, p. 45.

[^13]: Ippolita, *The Dark Side of Google,* Amsterdam: Institute of Network
    Cultures, 2013 (2007). See chapter seven, ‘Technocracy, Algocracy’.

[^14]: Donna Haraway, ‘A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and
    Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century’, in Donna Haraway,
    *Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature*, New York:
    Routledge, 1991, pp.149-181.

[^15]: Lucius T. Outlaw Jr., *On Race and Philosophy*, New York: Routledge,
    1996.

[^16]: Haraway, 'A Cyborg Manifesto'; Rosi Braidotti, Metamorphoses:
    Towards a Materialist Theory of Becoming , Cambridge: Polity Press
    2002.



