1.  **Before Google: A Pre-History of Search Engines in Analogue Times**
    [^1]

**Anton Tantner**

Googling – that is, searching the internet using the Google search
engine, which was developed in 1997[^2] – is by now
taken so much for granted that resources for searching and finding used
before Google seem outdated, whether they are library catalogs on index
cards, printed bibliographies, or address and telephone books – as
though they belonged to a past age, an age that may be described as the
‘analogue age’ in the future.

On various occasions over the last few years, research has tried to
consider past information technologies as precursors of the digital age.
Technologies facilitating the location of information within early
modern books, card catalogs, servants, and even popular German
television series such as Robert Lembke’s *Was bin ich?* or Eduard
Zimmermann’s *Aktenzeichen XY,* have been described as part of the
prehistory of computers.[^3] In my habilitation treatise
on *intelligence*or *registry offices,*I attempted to describe these
institutions as pre-modern search engines. These offices were
increasingly established in major European cities from the 17th century
onwards; they brokered information, but also all too often served as
watchdogs.[^4] In an overview article and in a
collection edited with Thomas Brandstetter and Thomas Hübel in 2012, I
tried to shed more light on these past resources of searching and
finding, the history of which has yet to be written.[^5]

Of course, one has to be aware of the problems of such an historical
approach. The term ‘pre-history’ might imply a kind of teleological view
of history, with the assumption that the glorious advent of Google was
the solution to all the problems that could not be solved in the past.
This is by no means the intention of this article. What I do intend to
study is how search worked in the past and what problems arose from it,
assuming that some of the problems are comparable to those we are
confronted with today, be it privacy issues, poor observance of the
secrecy of registered data, or government use of these services.

Today’s technological solutions may be new, but the problems they
address are older. Thus, the extensive data collection campaigns of the
Middle Ages and during the early modern period resulted, for example, in
the making of the Domesday Book of medieval England, the so-called
*Relaciones topográficas* composed during the reign of the Spanish king
Philipp II, the *enquêtes* by French minister Colbert, and the
‘Political Remarks of the Imperial War Council’ during the Hapsburg
monarchy in 1770-1772, all which may be compared to the ‘crawlers’ sent
out by current search engines to ‘harvest’ information. Their intention
was to make people’s property and their social and physical conditions
visible and legible for state authorities, and they were often met with
skepticism and resistance.[^6] Even the surveillance of
global internet communication by the NSA, which was made public in the
summer of 2013, did not surprise historians of the early modern postal
services. What nowadays are back doors allowing secret services to
control the big internet companies’ data traffic have famous precursors
in the ‘Black Cabinets’ and ‘Post Lodges’ of European governments, which
monitored correspondence via the mail services from the early modern
period.[^7]

In the following three sections, I will examine how knowledge was
indexed and ordered in the past, the ambivalence with which human
information brokers were regarded by those using their services, and
finally which institutions were created in order to exchange information
in the analogue age. This historical overview should not only provide
new insights about the past, but should also be useful to those who
study today’s search engines.

1.  **Disposition and Indexation of Knowledge**

How were books and bodies of knowledge arranged in order to facilitate
searching for them? We need to distinguish systematic disposition on the
one hand, in which books are registered and possibly arranged according
to a specific system or classification – a method used often in public
libraries – and, on the other hand, alphabetical organization, in which
books are registered according to the name of the author or, in a
subject catalog, according to keywords assigned by the librarian.

1.  *Systematic Organization: Dewey’s Decimal Classification*

For centuries, the systematic organization of books was pursued as an
ideal. Already during the 17th century, numbers were used for
classification systems; the system that is most famous today, the
so-called *Dewey Decimal Classification,* was created by U.S. librarian
Melvil Dewey in 1876, and later adapted and extended by Paul Otlet and
Henry LaFontaine in Europe. The ‘Decimal Classification’ groups human
knowledge into ten main classes, which are assigned the figures 0 to 9;
the figure 9, for example, is reserved for the discipline of ‘History’.
The main classes are further subdivided, and the longer the number, the
more detailed the description of the subject; for example, the history
of Austria is assigned the figure ‘943.6’. It is no surprise, then, that
this classification is strongly informed by the particular world view of
its creators; thus, in the original version, all world religions outside
Christianity were assigned the category ‘290 religions other than
Christianity’.[^8]

Decimal Classification is mainly used in science, technology, and
medical science, and serves as an organizing pattern for systematic
library catalogs, the shelving of books, and the compilation of
bibliographies.[^9]

1.  *Alphabetical Organization*

According to Peter Burke, alphabetical order was first introduced in the
‘Suidas’, a Byzantine encyclopedia from the 11th century, and
sporadically used over the following centuries, for example in
cataloging the library of the abbey of Saint-Victor in Paris at the
beginning of the 16th century. Only in the 17th century was the
alphabetical organization of books established in library catalogs and
bodies of knowledge such as encyclopedias, even though it was still
considered so unusual that authors had to laboriously justify its
use.[^10]

After the acceptance of alphabetical library catalogs, distinct rules
were created for them. These rules sometimes became extremely elaborate,
as in the case of the ‘Prussian Instructions’, which were laid down
during the compilation of the German General Catalog in 1899. In
Austria, the Prussian Instructions were adopted at the beginning of the
1930s in several research libraries, concurrent with the introduction of
card indices. Its adoption also had political implications, as some
German nationalist librarians welcomed the cataloging rules in force in
Germany as an anticipation of the ‘*Anschluss’* of Austria to
Germany.[^11] Many libraries continued to use the
Prussian Instructions up to the introduction of online catalogs. At that
moment, they were replaced by another system of rules, the system of
alphabetical cataloging that is usually identified by its German acronym
‘RAK’.[^12]

1.  *‘Search Engines’ in Books: Registers, Indices, Marginalia, Verse
    Numbers*

For the location of contents in a book, too, adequate resources needed
to be invented. Important tools that help a person gain an overview of a
particular book are the table of contents on the one hand, and the
register on the other hand, if the book contains one. The history of
such book registers, however, remains to be written; according to
historian Helmut Zedelmaier, they may be regarded as ‘search engines of
the early modern knowledge apparatus’.[^13]

Scholars also unlocked the Bible’s content using an entire apparatus of
resources: so-called concordances; polyglots, Bible editions in several
languages; canon tables, which indicate parallel passages in the
Gospels; harmonies, which joined the four Gospels into one text; and
synopses. Even a search aid that is self-evident to the present-day
reader still had to be invented. It was the publisher Robert Estienne
who, at least according to legend, divided the Bible into chapters while
on horseback in the 16th century and thus introduced the numbering of
verses that is still common in this fundamental text of occidental
fiction.[^14]

Especially in early modern times, such resources as title pages,
marginalia, or chapter summaries were inserted into books; they
anticipated present-day developments, and publishers succeeded in making
texts more user-friendly by allowing non-serial access. This
user-friendliness was, however, often paid for by a more restrictions to
individual interpretation.[^15]

1.  *From Bibliometric Citation Indices to Google’s PageRank*

One way of arranging and rating books that was invented in the 20th
century is so-called bibliometric, or citation indices. By means of this
method, a prioritized order of texts, articles, or books is established,
depending on how often they are cited in important journals; such
rankings may also be established using the footnotes of a scientific
text. A rather useful analogy for these metrics is linking on the
internet. Search engines rank the websites found in a query according to
the number of links to them. First efforts in this direction already
started in the 1920s; since the 1950s, the work of Eugene Garfield
gained influence after founding current citation indices, starting with
the *Science Citation Index (SCI)*dating from 1963. Such indices, today
available in the form of databases, calculate the influence or ‘impact’
of articles. The higher the ‘impact factor’, i.e. the more an article is
cited in journals judged to be scientifically excellent, the more
important that article is considered to be and the higher it is
ranked.[^16] There also is a similar citation index
for the field of humanities, the *Arts & Humanities Citation
Index.*Currently attempts are being made to establish such an index for
Europe, the *European Reference Index for the Humanities
(ERIH)*.[^17]

Citation analysis is crucial not only in the field of academic research,
but also for its important role in our current daily search life, as the
ranking processes of search engines work according to this principle.
The better a page is linked, the further up on the page it will appear
in search results. Linking is one of the factors used to determine the
ranking of a website. In the case of Google, this principle is called
‘PageRank’ – its name also being a pun, as ‘Page’ is the name of one of
Google’s founders, Larry Page.[^18]

Encyclopedias as Repositories of Knowledge

Another form of knowledge storage and indexing that may be regarded as
characteristic of early modern times is the major encyclopedia projects,
of which I will cite only three exemplary ones. The most famous of these
encyclopedias is without a doubt the *Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire
raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers*, founded by Diderot and
D’Alembert in the 18th century as one of the great projects of
Enlightenment. The *Encyclopédie*appeared from 1751 to 1780 and
comprises 35 volumes.[^19] Even earlier, Zedler’s
*Universal-Lexicon* was published in German mostly during the first half
of the 18th century (64 volumes, four supplement
volumes).[^20] Lastly, the *Encyclopédie
Anarchiste,*initiated by the anarchist educator Sébastien
Faure*,*appeared in French in four volumes from 1925 to 1934, running to
more than 2,800 pages. The manner of financing such a giant enterprise
was rarely employed elsewhere; some of the *Encyclopédie Anarchiste*'s
funding came from the famous Spanish anarchist Buenaventura Durutti, who
had seized the money from bank robberies.[^21]

1.  **Human Information Brokering Institutions**

Werner Faulstich identifies those media that work without necessarily
using technology as ‘primary media’ or ‘human media’, such as the
theater.[^22] In an analogy, it may be possible to
refer to institutions such as contact brokers, agents, or go-betweens,
as well as domestics and loan lackeys, servants, and concierges, as
‘human search engines’.

1.  *Contact Brokers, Servant Agents, Go-betweens*

The term *Beziehungsmakler* (contact broker) refers to the concept of a
broker, a term that today is mostly used in connection with stock
exchange brokers. According to a definition provided by Christoph
Windler,

brokers’ arrange contacts with individuals who themselves control needed
resources or can on their part establish further contacts […]. They
supervise critical connections between a local system and a broader
whole […]. Their position crucially depends on the importance of the
contacts brokered by them for the involved parties and the inexistence
of alternative channels of communication.[^23]

Some examples are the so-called *Gesindezubringer* (servant agents),
often elderly women; those looking for servants for their household were
able to approach them. Servant agents possessed specialized knowledge
about who was looking for work and were extremely unpopular with the
early modern authorities, because they were accused of poaching servants
once they had placed them, in order to collect the brokering fee as many
times as possible.[^24]

A similar function was fulfilled by the so-called *Unterkäufer*
(go-betweens) in the late Middle Ages and the early modern period, but
they were related to the sale of goods. When a foreign tradesman entered
a city, he was able to turn to such a go-between, who would help him
find resellers against a commission.[^25]

1.  *Servants and Loan Lackeys*

Servants, too, may be regarded as search engines. Here, we may
differentiate between those who worked in one household for a longer
period of time, and loan lackeys or porters appearing in bigger towns
and cities, whose services usually were enlisted by travelers for a
specified period of time.

Regarding the first group, Markus Krajewski has pointed to a literary
treatment of this issue by P.G. Wodehouse, who published a series of
miniatures about the Butler Jeeves in 1923, a manservant who may be
regarded as a positive information center. Jeeves functions as an
interface between the master of the house and the rest of the staff, and
in the course of his work, he gains deep insights into the financial and
other affairs of the noble family. It was consistent, then, that one of
the search engines competing with Google in the 1990s was called
AskJeeves.com; this name also alluded to the ambivalence of these
institutions. On the one hand, a human search engine is a helping hand,
on the other however, she or he is a bearer of secrets, consistently
suspect of being an informer, a spy, and of betraying these secrets to
other powers. This suspicious attitude was an especially pronounced
phenomenon around 1800, when in those noble or bourgeois families who
were able to afford servants, there prevailed a paranoia that servants
might spy on them.[^26] Even today, this anxiety
sometimes surfaces, as it did in a short story by Woody Allen in which
Allen’s nanny plans to write a scandal-mongering novel about
him.[^27]

The second group, loan lackeys, made their knowledge available only
temporarily, and their services were mainly enlisted by travelers, as
examples from Vienna and Prague show. The travel writer Johann Kaspar
Riesbeck reported that within three days of his arrival in Vienna, he
had found rooms for rent with the help of such a loan
lackey.[^28] A travel guide of Prague dated 1817
contains the following advice:

When [the stranger] wants to be instructed about the places he wishes to
visit, he should turn to the attendant at the tavern, in general called
a loan lackey, who will accompany the guest to his desired destination.
The loan lackey will also make all provisions so the stranger will be
supplied with all the articles he asks for.[^29]

1.  *Concierges*

Another type of ‘human search engine’ in larger towns and cities were
concierges; in a travel report by Friedrich Nicolai from Vienna in the
1780s, he says: ‘Who therefore has to look for someone in a big house,
only has to ask for the concierge, who will know all the tenants, who
often are not acquainted with each other.’[^30] Also
when looking for an apartment, concierges could play an important role,
as they kept in touch with each other and therefore knew about empty
apartments, which made them a ‘central contact point for accommodation
seekers not connected to the house’.[^31] Their
services, however, are not as innocent as they seem at first glance, as
the writings of Josef Richter, another chronicler of Vienna, show. In
1785, he called the concierges a proper ‘plague of the houses’. ‘Most
unbearable and rude are the concierges, who are at the same time
friends, advisors, and spies for the house inspectors and
administrators, even though they be imperial and
royal.’[^32]

The profession of a concierge emerged in Vienna when large tenant houses
were built, and the owner of the house often no longer lived in the
house himself. The institution of the concierge was created as a link
between him and the tenants. The concierge would collect the rent, and
his duties included ‘[knowing] everything about any events in the house
and if need be, to report to the owner. He knew all tenants in person,
often he knew all personal and professional affairs of a family before
they had even moved in.’ The Viennese concierges also cooperated with
the police in a reciprocal relationship. The police were informed about
suspect tenants, and the concierge got advance information about
prospective tenants.[^33]

1.  **Institutions of Information Brokerage**

Archives, libraries, and museums, as well as schools and universities,
are the classic sites of occidental knowledge and information
communication. Especially the catalogs of libraries with their different
systems of registering and allowing access to books stored in them have
informed our understanding of searching and finding for centuries.
Manuscript catalogs in book form, which for a long time had been the
ideal, were only replaced by index cards in the course of the 19th
century, before online electronic catalogs were established at the end
of the 20th^^century.[^34]

By contrast, those sites and institutions that served to broker everyday
information have attracted less interest. A selection of these will be
presented in this article.

1.  *Inns and Coffee Houses*

The activities of inns and coffee houses extended far beyond serving
drinks and offering food. Historians of these public houses report
auctioneers offering their wares, dentists practicing their profession,
and travelers looking for information about foreign places. The English
diarist Samuel Pepys wrote in his diary that he went to the inn solely
to satisfy his desire to hear the news.[^35] Inns
served as information and contact exchanges. Contracts were concluded,
news passed on, disputes were held, and protests were organized; inns
were (and are) at the same time meeting points, transit points for
goods, banks, employment agencies, and gathering spaces. State
functions, too, were held there. In some villages that didn’t have a
courthouse, court sessions were held in the presence of the public at
the inn. The inn also sometimes served as a place for publicizing laws.
The inn was also used as lodgings for traveling diplomats, and finally,
it held the media function of a point of exchange for news. No wonder,
then, that clerical powers tried again and again to stigmatize the inn
as a place of sin.[^36]

The coffee house's distinction was as a site of political debates. As
early as the mid-18th century, to be more exact in 1743, one observer,
Theodor Johann Quistorp asserted that ‘a coffee house was as it were a
political stock exchange, where the bravest and most spirited heads from
all cities converged’.[^37]

1.  *Intelligence Offices: the Example of the Paris Bureau d’Adresse,
    1630-1643*

Emerging in the 17th century and lasting until the early 19th century,
so-called intelligence offices were another specific type of information
exchange in addition to inns and coffee houses. These institutions
brokered employment, apartments, wares, and money against a fee, and
occasionally published advertisers.

The earliest and at the same time most famous of these intelligence
offices was the *Bureau d’adresse*established by Théophraste Renaudot in
Paris circa 1630. Renaudot – who is known as the founder of one of the
first French newspapers, the *Gazette (de France)* – was convinced that,
beyond detention of the poor in workhouses – the *grand enfermement* as
described by Foucault – it was also necessary to provide suitable
institutions for the placement of workers. After having secured the
support of Cardinal Richelieu, Renaudot was able to open his *Bureau
d’adresse* at the Maison du Grand-Coq on the Quai du Marché Neuf in the
Rue de la Calandre.

The activities of this *bureau*were numerous and diverse. First, it
provided information for people who were looking for it. Those who
looked for street addresses or a traveling companion, who needed to
learn the names or residences of famous individuals such as theologians,
physicians, or attorneys, were able to turn to the *bureau* and hope for
an answer. The *bureau* also served as a sales agency. Whoever had
something to sell was able to have his or her wares entered into a
register against a fee of three *sous*; whoever looked for certain
goods, was able to take a look into the register, also for a fee. On
sale were not only mobile goods such as antiques, books, or machinery,
but also animals – once, even a dromedary was offered – as well as real
estate including country estates and houses. The *bureau* was also used
as an employment agency. Open positions were entered into a separate
register, and teachers, servants, and journeymen looking for work were
able to direct their requests to the *bureau*. The *bureau* occasionally
published its own journal, the *Feuille du Bureau d’Adresse,*in which
excerpts of register entries were published. In addition to this, the
*bureau* supported medical care – Renaudot was a physician by education
– which was mainly directed at the poor. After a first consultation, the
sick were referred to physicians, surgeons, or apothecaries who treated
them pro bono. The *bureau* also worked as a pawnshop. When someone
needed short-term funds, they were able to deposit property at the
office and mortgage it. Finally, the office assumed the role of a
scientific academy. From 1633, lectures were held in the rooms of the
bureau every Monday at two pm – the *conférences du Bureau d’adresse,*
which covered a number of different subjects, such as medicine, physical
phenomena, or economics. On 3 February 1642, a question was discussed
that famously has been of tremendous interest to humanity since time
immemorial: ‘What was made first, the egg or the
chicken?’[^38]

Because of the extensive activities of the *bureau*, it repeatedly ran
afoul of individuals whose business it interfered with. Thus, the
journeymen’s associations, which traditionally served as employment
agencies, were by no means happy about the competitor that the *bureau*
constituted for them in this area. Above all, however, it was the
medical faculty that took action against the *bureau*, especially when
Renaudot wanted to further extend his medical counseling activities.
Nevertheless, Renaudot’s adversaries only succeeded when his protector,
Cardinal Richelieu, died. In 1643, Renaudot’s *Bureau d’adresse*had to
abandon most of its activities.[^39]

The Universal Register Office, London 1750

One successor of the Bureau d’Adresse was the Universal Register Office
founded by the Fielding brothers in 1750. According to its
self-description the office’s declared aim was ‘to bring the World […]
together into one place’.[^40] This sounds quite
similar to the well-known self-description of Google: ‘Google’s mission
is to organize the world's information and make it universally
accessible and useful.’[^41] The self-description of
the Universal Register Office continues: ‘In large and populous cities
[…] every human Talent is dispersed somewhere or other among the
Members; and consequently every Person who stands in Need of that
Talent, might supply his Want, if he knew where to find it; but to know
this is the Difficulty, and this Difficulty still encreases with the
Largeness of the Society.’ The Fielding brothers’ Universal Register
Office promised to afford remedy: It would bring together buyers and
sellers, teachers and pupils, tradesmen and their partners, finally
masters and apprentices or servants.[^42]

Like its Parisian predecessor the Universal Register Office served as a
sales agency, a labor office, a pawnshop and also a travel agency.
Anyone wishing to have their names entered onto, or to consult the
Universal Register Office’s registries could do so for a fee between
three pence and one shilling. One of the main tasks of this institution
was labor exchange; the Fielding brothers understood this service also
as a means of fighting crime: According to them depraved servants were
responsible for most crimes; potential masters were informed, that no
servant would be registered who seemed suspicious or who was living in a
disreputable place. Dismissed servants would not be registered any
longer if the former masters informed the office. By doing so the
Universal Register Office would be a ‘public eye’ concerning
servants.[^43] In addition the methods adopted by the
Fielding brothers were also directed at crime prevention by protecting
newcomers from the countryside from fraud. To that end, Henry Fielding
set up an information office exclusively concerned with uncovering
crimes: All facts on fraud and crimes, all criminals, every robbery
committed, any object lost were to be gathered at one place, and the
names and descriptions of offenders recorded in a
register;[^44] so the Universal Register Office was
also designed as a government utopia contributing to a surveillance
society.

1.  *The*Anfrage- und Auskunftscomptoir*, Vienna, 1819*

An institution similar to the information offices developed at the
beginning of the 19th century, namely the offices of inquiry and
information (*Anfrage- und Auskunftscomptoire*). So far, such
institutions are known for Vienna, Wrocław/Breslau and Munich. Joseph
Jüttner and Baron Karl von Steinau founded the *Anfrage- und
Auskunftscomptoir*in Vienna in 1819, and they offered its services by
arguing, amongst others reasons, that loan servants were unreliable. An
1822 travel guide has the following to say:

For a modest fee of 20 kr[euzer]. to 1 fl. [guilder], the managers [of
this establishment] offer information on resident citizens and
foreigners, doctors of medicine and of the law, about civil servants,
scholars, artists etc., on local affairs and the facilities of public
institutes; on the authorities and state officers; on all kinds of
company trading; on loans on mortgages and commodities; on available
products of nature and artifice for buyers and sellers; on opportunities
for travel; on employers and domestics looking for employment; on
purchases and leases of houses, realties etc., on apartments,
warehouses, stables, factories etc., in short, on all civil and social
dealings and affairs, of which knowledge is
permitted.[^45]

A satire aimed at this information office was published in *Eipeldauer*
magazine in 1820:

About the *Auskunftscomptoir,* which fortunately was established in
Vienna a short while ago, I happen to know a few anecdotes. For one day,
a Hungarian hay farmer went there and said: ‘Gentlemen, would I like to
know, if my young wife, while I am in Vienna and sell my hay, is
faithful to me in my Hungarian land! So please, be so kind, and look it
up.’ Another came and wanted to know whether his rich cousin in Günz was
going to die this year, and make him his heir. Oh my lord and cousin, if
only the gentlemen at the *Comptoir* could find all such things, they
would undoubtedly be even busier. I for my part, I would have looked up
whether the public will be satisfied with me for long, and whether the
*Eipeldauer* will continue to increase its
readership.[^46]

– Here, the *Comptoir* was alleged to be able to supply information
about the future; as is often the case, a new medium triggered utopias
of omniscience.

1.  *Press Clipping Services*

Press clipping services constitute an additional specialized institution
of information exchange.[^47] The initial problem
these institutions promised to redress was quite clear and was expressed
for example by one of Dostoyevsky’s characters at the beginning of the
1870s. There was a mass of newspapers appearing daily that reported on a
number of interesting events, but finding them after some time was
nearly impossible.[^48] Press clipping services were
finally created not for retrospective use, but for searching for a
subject at the current moment in time. The first such office to become
famous was founded under the name *Argus de la Presse* in Paris in 1879.
According to its founding legend, its inventor, Comte
François-Gaston-Auguste de Chambure, often watched artists while they
were looking through the newspapers at newsstands for articles about
their work. de Chambure proceeded to cut reviews from a few newspapers
and to forward them to the respective artists, and this evolved into a
real enterprise. From Paris, press clipping services spread to other
cities. For example, an employee of the *Argus de la Presse*, the writer
and journalist Max Karfunkel, established this service for
Berlin.[^49] From a description of the early days of
these services, it appears that the job of reading the newspapers was
mostly done by women:

Finally, 60 young women sat in Romeike’s New York house, bowed over
1,090 newspapers and 5,000 magazines. Whenever they raise their eyes
from the columns, they are caught by the list of names and subjects they
have to consider; but this list contains only those which are most
difficult to remember, all others they need to know by heart; 7,000
names and subjects in all. All girls have to make use of their lynx’
eyes for all clients. Twice a day, a bell sounds, an overseer appears
and reads off new customers and subjects. These girls don’t cut out,
they only mark with a pencil. The cutting is done by a group of boys.
Then there is another group of girls who sort the clippings into
pigeonholes.[^50]

1.  **Conclusion**

Obviously, this historical overview is far from complete; one could for
example add the finding aids used for people search, such as address
books including Nicolas de Blegny’s *Livre Commode* dating from
1691/1692, state calendars, or the Red Cross Tracing Service dedicated
to the search for missing people after the world
wars.[^51] What this survey has clearly shown,
however, is that although the tools for searching can be very useful,
they are not innocent. Loan lackeys and concierges provided their
clients with helpful information but sometimes revealed their desires to
police officers. Intelligence offices facilitated the exchange of goods
but were suspected of making public what should stay secret within the
families.[^52]

Concerning this ambivalence, internet historian Mercedes Bunz uses the

term ‘frenemy’ to describe the oscillation of applications such as
Google between friendly usefulness and hostile control of users’
desires:

Because of their dangerously detailed knowledge, net companies possess a
new form of power – it is not for nothing that Google is described as a
‘frenemy’. These internet companies are dangerous like enemies because
of their knowledge – and knowledge is power, today more than ever – but
they appear to be friends. They make life easier. They are no rulers in
a Hegelian sense. Theirs is a different form of power, and this power is
dangerous – but it is not automatically subjugating, bad or
evil.[^53]

It appears that this Janus-faced quality can already be demonstrated of
the search aids of the ‘analogue age’, which explains why they were
sometimes met with some skepticism. Concierges, servants, information
offices, and the like are situated in the contested field between
private utilization and the authorities’ claims, which are re-negotiated
with the appearance of each new search aid.

1.  **References**

Allen, Woody. ‘Nanny Dearest’, in Woody Allen, Mere Anarchy, New York:
Random House, 2007, pp. 55-64.

Bauer, Volker (ed.). *Repertorium territorialer Amtskalender und
Amtshandbücher im Alten Reich. Adreß-, Hof-, Staatskalender und
Staatshandbücher des 18. Jahrhunderts,* Vol. 1-4, Frankfurt am Main:
Klostermann, 1997-2005.

\_\_\_\_. ‘Herrschaftsordnung, Datenordnung, Suchoptionen.
Recherchemöglichkeiten in Staatskalendern und Staatshandbüchern des 18.
Jahrhunderts’, in Thomas Brandstetter et al. (eds) *Vor Google. Eine
Mediengeschichte der Suchmaschine im analogen Zeitalter,* Bielefeld:
Transcript, 2012, pp. 85-108.

[Bäuerle, Adolph]. *Briefe des jüngsten Eipeldauers an seinen Herrn
Vettern in Kakran*, 5th issue, Wien: n.p. 1820.

Blome, Astrid. ‘Offices of Intelligence and Expanding Social Spaces’, in
Brendan Dooley (ed.) *The Dissemination of News and the Emergence of
Contemporaneity in Early Modern Europe*, Farnham: Ashgate, 2010.

Bödeker, Hans Erich. ‘Das Kaffeehaus als Institution aufklärerischer
Geselligkeit’, in Étienne François (ed.) *Sociabilité et société
bourgeoise en France, en Allemagne, et en Suisse, 1750-1850.
Geselligkeit, Vereinswesen und bürgerliche Gesellschaft in Frankreich,
Deutschland und der Schweiz, 1750-1850,* Paris: Editions Recherche sur
les Civilisations, 1986, pp. 65-80.

Brandstetter, Thomas, Thomas Hübel, and Anton Tantner (eds). *Vor
Google. Eine Mediengeschichte der Suchmaschine im analogen Zeitalter,*
Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012.

Bunz, Mercedes. ‘Sozial 2.0: Herr, Knecht, Feind, Freund. Soziale
Netzwerke und die Ökonomie der Freundschaft’, in *De:Bug. Elektronische
Lebensaspekte,* 120 (11 March 2008), http://de-bug.de/mag/5422.html;
short version reprinted in: *analyse & kritik*541 (21 August 2009): 14.

Burke, Peter. *The Historical Anthropology of Early Modern Italy: Essays
on Perception and Communication,* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1987.

\_\_\_\_. *A Social History of Knowledge: From Gutenberg to Diderot,*
Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000.

Cooper, Alix. 'Fragen ohne Antworten. Die Suche nach lokalen
Informationen in der frühen Aufklärung’, in Thomas Brandstetter et al.
(eds) *Vor Google. Eine Mediengeschichte der Suchmaschine im analogen
Zeitalter,* Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012, pp. 73-83.

Corns, Thomas N. ‘The Early Modern Search Engine: Indices, Title Pages,
Marginalia and Contents’, in Neil Rhodes and Jonathan Sawday (eds) *The
Renaissance Computer. Knowledge Technology in the First Age of Print,*
London-New York: Routledge, 2000, pp. 95-105.

Darnton, Robert. The Business of Enlightenment: A Publishing History of
the Encyclopédie, 1775-1800, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1987 (1979).

Dostoyevsky, Fyodor. *Demons*, trans. Richard Pevear and Larissa
Volkhonsky, New York: Vintage Classics, 1995 (1872).

Enzensberger, Hans Magnus. *Der kurze Sommer der Anarchie. Buenaventura
Durrutis Leben und Tod,* 10th edition, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp st
395, 1994.

Faulstich, Werner. ‘Medium’, in Werner Faulstich (ed.) *Grundwissen
Medien,* 5th edition, München: Fink, 2004, pp. 13-102.

Feyel, Gilles. *L’Annonce et la nouvelle. La presse d’information en
France sous l’ancien régime (1630-1788),* Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2000.

Fielding, Henry. ‘A Plan of the Universal Register-Office’, in Bertrand
A. Goldgar (ed.), *The Covent-Garden Journal and A Plan of the Universal
Register-Office*, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988, pp. 3-10.

Gierl, Martin. ‚Enzyklopädie’, in Friedrich Jaeger (ed.) *Enzyklopädie
der Neuzeit,* Stuttgart et al.: Metzler, 2005 et sequ., vol. 3, 2006,
col. 344-356.

Giesecke, Michael. *Der Buchdruck in der frühen Neuzeit. Eine
historische Fallstudie über die Durchsetzung neuer Informations- und
Kommunikationstechnologien,* 4^th^ edition, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp,
2006.

Groebner, Valentin. ‘Mobile Werte, informelle Ökonomie. Zur ‘Kultur’ der
Armut in der spätmittelalterlichen Stadt’, in Otto Gerhard Oexle (ed.)
*Armut im Mittelalter,* Ostfildern: Thorbecke, 2004, pp. 165-187.

Gugerli, David. *Suchmaschinen. Die Welt als Datenbank,* Frankfurt am
Main: Suhrkamp eu 19, 2009.

Hacker, Rupert. *Bibliothekarisches Grundwissen,* 4^th^ edition,
München: Saur, 2000.

Heesen, Anke te. *Der Zeitungsausschnitt. Ein Papierobjekt der Moderne,*
Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, 2006.

Hochedlinger, Michael and Tantner, Anton (eds). *‘... Der größte Teil
der Untertanen lebt elend und mühselig’. Die Berichte des Hofkriegsrates
zur sozialen und wirtschaftlichen Lage der Habsburgermonarchie
1770-1771,* Innsbruck-Wien-Bozen: Studienverlag, 2005 (Mitteilungen des
Österreichischen Staatsarchivs Sonderband 8).

Horn, Eva. *Der geheime Krieg. Verrat, Spionage und moderne Fiktion,*
Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, 2007.

Jele, Harald. *Wissenschaftliches Arbeiten in Bibliotheken. Einführung
für StudentInnen,* München-Wien: Oldenbourg, 1999.

Jochum, Uwe. *Kleine Bibliotheksgeschichte,* Stuttgart: Reclam U-B 8915,
1993.

Jubert, Gérard (ed.). *Père des journalistes et médecin des pauvres.
Théophraste Renaudot (1586 – 1653),* Paris: Champion, 2005.

Krajewski, Markus. Paper Machines. About Cards & Catalogs, 1548-1929,
trans. Peter Krapp, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011.

\_\_\_\_. *Der Diener. Mediengeschichte einer Figur zwischen König und
Klient,* Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer, 2010.

\_\_\_\_. ‘Ask Jeeves. Servants as Search Engines’, translated by
Charles Marcrum, II, in *Grey Room*38 (Winter 2010): 6-19.

Kümin, Beat. ‘Drinking and Public Space in Early Modern German Lands’,
in *Contemporary Drug Problems* 32 (2005): 9-27.

Küster, Marc W. *Geordnetes Weltbild. Die Tradition des alphabetischen
Sortierens von der Keilschrift bis zur EDV. Eine Kulturgeschichte,*
Tübingen: Niemeyer, 2006.

Mattl-Wurm, Sylvia and Pfoser, Alfred (eds). *Die Vermessung Wiens.
Lehmanns Adressbücher 1859–1942,* Wien: Metroverlag, 2011.

Mittendorfer, Konstanze. *Biedermeier oder: Das Glück im Haus. Bauen und
Wohnung in Wien und Berlin 1800-1850,* Wien: Verlag für
Gesellschaftskritik, 1991.

Nicolai, Friedrich. *Beschreibung einer Reise durch Deutschland und die
Schweiz, im Jahre 1781,* Berlin-Stettin: n.p., 1783. Reprint:
Hildesheim: Olms, 1994 (Collected Works 16, Edited by Bernhard Fabian
and Marie-Luise Spieckermann).

Ogborn, Miles. *Spaces of Modernity. London’s Geographies 1680-1780*,
New York/London: Guilford Press, 1998.

P.A., ‘Herr der tausend Scheren. Der Letzte der Romeikes,
Zeitungsausschnitt’, in *Sammlung Feldhaus*, Akten 7253, I. Depositum 40
Feldhaus, sheet 1-3.

Payer, Peter. *Hausmeister in Wien. Aufstieg und Niedergang einer
Respektsperson,* Wien. 1996 (Wiener Geschichtsblätter Beihefte 1996, Nr.
4).

Petersen, Thomas et al. ‘Der Fragebogen Karls des Großen. Ein Dokument
aus der Vorgeschichte der Umfrageforschung’, in *Kölner Zeitschrift für
Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie* 56 (2004): 736-745.

Petschar, Hans. ‘Einige Bemerkungen, die sorgfältige Verfertigung eines
Bibliothekskatalogs für das allgemeine Lesepublikum betreffend’, in Hans
Petschar, Ernst Strouhal and Heimo Zobernig (eds) *Der Zettelkatalog.
Ein historisches System geistiger Ordnung,* Wien-New York: Springer,
1999, pp. 17-42.

Pezzl, Johann. *Neueste Beschreibung von Wien,* 6^th^ edition, Wien:
Armbruster, n.d. (1822).

Pradel, Abraham (=Blegny, Nicolas de). *Les Adresses de la Ville de
Paris avec le Tresor des Almanachs. Livre Commode En tous lieux, en tous
temps, & en toutes conditions,* Paris: n.p., 1691; reprint of the 2^nd^
edition 1692: Abraham du Pradel (= Nicolas de Blegny), *Le livre commode
des adresses de Paris pour 1692,* Édouard Fournier (ed.) Vol. 1-2,
Paris: Paul Daffis, 1878.

*Prager Wegweiser zum Unterricht und Bequemlichkeit der Fremden und
Kenntniß der Einheimischen (...)*. Prague: Betterl v. Wildenbrunn, 1817.

Rau, Susanne and Schwerhoff, Gerd. ‘Frühneuzeitliche
Gasthaus-Geschichte(n) zwischen stigmatisierenden Fremdzuschreibungen
und fragmentierten Geltungserzählungen’, in Gert Melville and Hans
Vorländer (eds) *Geltungsgeschichten. Über die Stabilisierung und
Legitimierung institutioneller Ordnungen,* Köln-Weimar-Wien: Böhlau,
2002, pp. 181-201.

Reinöhl, Fritz. ‘Die österreichischen Informationsbüros des Vormärz,
ihre Akten und Protokolle’, in *Archivalische Zeitschrift* 38 (1929):
261-288.

Renaudot, Eusèbe (ed.). *Cinquiesme et dernier tome du Recueil général
des questions traittées ès conférences du Bureau d’addresse (…),* Paris:
Besogne, 1655.

Reppesgaard, Lars. *Das Google-Imperium,* Hamburg: Murmann, 2008.

Rhodes, Neil and Jonathan Sawday. ‘Paperworlds: Imagining the
Renaissance Computer’ in Neil Rhodes and Jonathan Sawday (eds), *The
Renaissance Computer. Knowledge Technology in the First Age of Print,*
London-New York: Routledge, 2000, pp. 1-17.

[Richter, Joseph]. *Wienerische Musterkarte ein Beytrag zur Schilderung
Wiens. 6 Stück,* Wien: n.p., 1785.

Rieder, Bernhard. 'Zentralität und Sichtbarkeit. Mathematik als
Hierarchisierungsinstrument am Beispiel der frühen Bibliometrie’, in
Thomas Brandstetter et al. (eds) *Vor Google. Eine Mediengeschichte der
Suchmaschine im analogen Zeitalter,* Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012, pp.
223-252.

Riesbeck, Johann Kaspar. *Briefe eines Reisenden Franzosen über
Deutschland an seinen Bruder zu Paris,* 2 volumes, 2^nd^ edition, s.l.:
n.p., 1784.

Scheutz, Martin. ‘'hab ichs auch im würthshauß da und dort gehört [...]’
Gaststätten als multifunktionale öffentliche Orte im 18. Jahrhundert’,
in Martin Scheutz, Wolfgang Schmale and Dana Štefanová (eds) *Orte des
Wissens,* (Jahrbuch der österreichischen Gesellschaft zur Erforschung
des 18. Jahrhunderts 18/19), Bochum: n.p., 2004, pp. 169-203.

Schmieder, Eberhard. ‘Unterkäufer im Mittelalter. Ein Beitrag zur
Wirtschafts- und Handelsgeschichte vornehmlich Süddeutschlands’, in
*Vierteljahrsschrift für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte* 30 (1937):
229-260.

Soll, Jacob. *The Information Master: Jean-Baptiste Colbert’s Secret
State Intelligence System,* Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
2009.

Solomon, Howard M. *Public Welfare, Science and Propaganda in
Seventeenth Century France: The Innovations of Théophraste Renaudot,*
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972.

Stagl, Justin. *A History of Curiosity: The Theory of Travel, 1550-1800*
(Studies in Anthropology and History), London-New York: Routledge, 1995.

Stalder, Felix and Mayer, Christine. ‘ The Second Index. Search Engines,
Personalization and Surveillance ’, in Konrad Becker, Felix Stalder
(eds), Deep Search. The Politics of Search Beyond Google,
Innsbruck-Wien-Bozen: Studienverlag, 2009, distributed by Transaction
Publishers, New Jersey, pp. 98-115.

Statistisches Departement im k.k. Handelsministerium (ed.), *Die
Arbeitsvermittlung in Österreich,* Wien: n.p., 1898.

Tantner, Anton. *Adressbüros im Europa der Frühen Neuzeit,* Habilitation
treatise, submitted at the Faculty of Historical and Cultural Studies at
the University of Vienna, Wien: Universität Wien, 2011,
http://phaidra.univie.ac.at/o:128115.

\_\_\_\_\_. ‘Suchen und finden vor Google. Eine Skizze’, in
*Mitteilungen der Vereinigung österreichischer Bibliothekarinnen &
Bibliothekare,* 64 (2011): 42-69.

Vise, David and Malseed, Mark. *The Google Story,* New York: Delacorte
Press, 2005.

Weidner, Daniel. ‘‘Wende sie um und um, denn alles ist in ihr.’ Über das
Suchen in heiligen Texten’, in Thomas Brandstetter et al. (eds) *Vor
Google. Eine Mediengeschichte der Suchmaschine im analogen Zeitalter,*
Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012, pp. 41-72.

Weinberger, David. *Everything is Miscellaneous: The Power of the New
Digital Disorder,* New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2008.

Windler, Christian. ‘Gemeinde und königliche Gerichte in Spanien im
ausgehenden Ancien Régime’, in *Zeitschrift für Historische Forschung*
24 (1997): 53-87.

Winkelbauer, Thomas. ‘Postwesen und Staatsbildung in der
Habsburgermonarchie im 17. und 18. Jahrhundert’, in *Wiener
Geschichtsblätter* 68 (2013): 69-86.

Zedelmaier, Helmut. ‘Facilitas inveniendi. Zur Pragmatik alphabetischer
Buchregister’, in Theo Stammen and Wolfgang E.J. Weber (eds)
*Wissenssicherung, Wissensordnung und Wissensverarbeitung. Das
europäische Modell der Enzyklopädien,* Berlin: Akademie, 2004 (Colloquia
Augustana 18), pp. 191-203.

Zwahr, Helmut. ‘Das deutsche Stadtadreßbuch als orts- und
sozialgeschichtliche Quelle’, in *Jahrbuch für Regionalgeschichte* 3
(1968): 204-229.

Notes
=====

[^1]: Translated by Brita Pohl, www.bricolangue.at.

[^2]: On the history of Google cf. among others the following journalistic
    accounts: David Vise and Mark Malseed, *The Google Story,* New York:
    Delacorte Press, 2005; Lars Reppesgaard, *Das Google-Imperium,*
    Hamburg: Murmann, 2008.

[^3]: Thomas N. Corns, ‘The Early Modern Search Engine: Indices, Title
    Pages, Marginalia and Contents’, in Neil Rhodes and Jonathan Sawday
    (eds) *The Renaissance Computer. Knowledge Technology in the First
    Age of Print,* London-New York: Routledge, 2000, pp. 95-105; Markus
    Krajewski, *Paper Machines. About Cards & Catalogs,
    1548-1929,*trans. Peter Krapp. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011;
    Markus Krajewski, *Der Diener. Mediengeschichte einer Figur zwischen
    König und Klient,* Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer, 2010; David
    Gugerli, *Suchmaschinen. Die Welt als Datenbank,* Frankfurt am Main:
    Suhrkamp eu 19, 2009. For an overview of many of the issues touched
    upon in this article, see Peter Burke, *A Social History of
    Knowledge: from Gutenberg to Diderot,* Cambridge: Polity Press,
    2000.

[^4]: Anton Tantner, *Adressbüros im Europa der Frühen Neuzeit,*
    Habilitation treatise, submitted at the Faculty of Historical and
    Cultural Studies at the University of Vienna, Wien: Universität
    Wien, 2011, http://phaidra.univie.ac.at/o:128115.

[^5]: Anton Tantner, ‘Suchen und finden vor Google. Eine Skizze’, in
    *Mitteilungen der Vereinigung österreichischer Bibliothekarinnen &
    Bibliothekare* 64 (2011): 42-69; Thomas Brandstetter, Thomas Hübel,
    and Anton Tantner, (eds), *Vor Google. Eine Mediengeschichte der
    Suchmaschine im analogen Zeitalter,*Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012; the
    present article is based on these two last publications.

[^6]: Peter Burke, *The Historical Anthropology of Early Modern Italy.
    Essays on Perception and Communication,* Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1987, pp. 28-31; Peter Burke, *A Social History of
    Knowledge*, pp. 129-132; for a monograph on Colbert’s intelligence
    system, see Jacob Soll, *The Information Master: Jean-Baptiste
    Colbert’s Secret State Intelligence System,* Ann Arbor: University
    of Michigan Press, 2009; Michael Hochedlinger and Anton Tantner
    (eds) *‘... Der größte Teil der Untertanen lebt elend und mühselig’.
    Die Berichte des Hofkriegsrates zur sozialen und wirtschaftlichen
    Lage der Habsburgermonarchie 1770-1771,* Innsbruck-Wien-Bozen:
    Studienverlag, 2005 (Mitteilungen des Österreichischen Staatsarchivs
    Sonderband 8).

[^7]: Thomas Winkelbauer, ‘Postwesen und Staatsbildung in der
    Habsburgermonarchie im 17. und 18. Jahrhundert’, in *Wiener
    Geschichtsblätter* 68 (2013): 69-86, at 82-85 with further
    literature.

[^8]: Felix Stalder and Christine Mayer, ‘The Second Index. Search
    Engines, Personalization and Surveillance’, in Konrad Becker, Felix
    Stalder (eds), *Deep Search. The Politics of Search Beyond Google,*
    Innsbruck-Wien-Bozen: Studienverlag, 2009, p. 98.

[^9]: Harald Jele, *Wissenschaftliches Arbeiten in Bibliotheken.
    Einführung für StudentInnen,* München-Wien: Oldenbourg, 1999, pp.
    41-49, 102-109; David Weinberger, *Everything is Miscellaneous: The
    Power of the New Digital Disorder,* New York: Henry Holt and
    Company, 2008, pp. 64-84.

[^10]: Peter Burke, *A Social History of Knowledge*, pp. 109-10, 184-87;
    Neil Rhodes and Jonathan Sawday, ‘Paperworlds: Imagining the
    Renaissance Computer’ in Neil Rhodes and Jonathan Sawday (eds) *The
    Renaissance Computer. Knowledge Technology in the First Age of
    Print,* London-New York: Routledge, 2000, pp. 8-9; for a survey of
    the history of alphabetical sorting: Marc W. Küster, *Geordnetes
    Weltbild. Die Tradition des alphabetischen Sortierens von der
    Keilschrift bis zur EDV. Eine Kulturgeschichte,* Tübingen: Niemeyer,
    2006.

[^11]: Hans Petschar, ‘Einige Bemerkungen, die sorgfältige Verfertigung
    eines Bibliothekskatalogs für das allgemeine Lesepublikum
    betreffend’, in Hans Petschar, Ernst Strouhal, and Heimo Zobernig
    (eds) *Der Zettelkatalog. Ein historisches System geistiger
    Ordnung,* Wien-New York: Springer, 1999, pp. 35-36 and 42, FN 65.

[^12]: Rupert Hacker, *Bibliothekarisches Grundwissen,* 4th edition,
    München: Saur, 2000, pp. 181-195.

[^13]: Helmut Zedelmaier, ‘Facilitas inveniendi. Zur Pragmatik
    alphabetischer Buchregister’, in Theo Stammen and Wolfgang E.J.
    Weber (eds) *Wissenssicherung, Wissensordnung und
    Wissensverarbeitung. Das europäische Modell der Enzyklopädien,*
    Berlin: Akademie, 2004 (Colloquia Augustana 18), pp. 193 (citation)
    and 201.

[^14]: Daniel Weidner, ‘‘Wende sie um und um, denn alles ist in ihr.’ Über
    das Suchen in heiligen Texten’, in Thomas Brandstetter et al. (eds)
    *Vor Google*, pp. 41-72.

[^15]: Thomas N. Corns, ‘The Early Modern Search Engine’, p 103.

[^16]: Bernhard Rieder, ‘Zentralität und Sichtbarkeit. Mathematik als
    Hierarchisierungsinstrument am Beispiel der frühen Bibliometrie’, in
    Thomas Brandstetter et al. (eds), *Vor Google*, p. 223–252.

[^17]: For further information on the ERIH, see
    http://www.esf.org/hosting-experts/scientific-review-groups/humanities/erih-european-reference-index-for-the-humanities.html.

[^18]: See e.g. Reppesgaard, *Das Google-Imperium*, p 77.

[^19]: Cf. e.g. Robert Darnton, The Business of Enlightenment: A Publishing
    History of the Encyclopédie, 1775-1800, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
    University Press, 1987 (1979). For the digitized ‘encyclopédie’,
    see: http://portail.atilf.fr/encyclopedie/.

[^20]: Digitized version: http://www.zedler-lexikon.de. For general
    information on encyclopedias, see Martin Gierl, ‘Enzyklopädie’, in
    Friedrich Jaeger (ed.), *Enzyklopädie der Neuzeit*. Stuttgart:
    Metzler, 2005 et sequ., vol. 3, 2006, pp. 344-356.

[^21]: Hans Magnus Enzensberger, *Der kurze Sommer der Anarchie.
    Buenaventura Durrutis Leben und Tod,*10th edition, Frankfurt am
    Main: Suhrkamp st 395, 1994, pp. 57, 64. Digitized version:
    http://www.encyclopedie-anarchiste.org/.

[^22]: Werner Faulstich, ‘Medium’, in Werner Faulstich (ed.) *Grundwissen
    Medien,* München: Fink, 2004, pp. 13, 23-25.

[^23]: Christian Windler, ‘Gemeinde und königliche Gerichte in Spanien im
    ausgehenden Ancien Régime’, in *Zeitschrift für Historische
    Forschung* 24 (1997): 56; for general information on go-betweens,
    see Valentin Groebner, ‘Mobile Werte, informelle Ökonomie. Zur
    ‘Kultur’ der Armut in der spätmittelalterlichen Stadt’, in Otto
    Gerhard Oexle (ed.) *Armut im Mittelalter,* Ostfildern: Thorbecke,
    2004, pp. 175–180.

[^24]: Statistisches Departement im k.k. Handelsministerium (ed.) *Die
    Arbeitsvermittlung in Österreich,* Wien: n.p., 1898, p. 26.

[^25]: Eberhard Schmieder, ‘Unterkäufer im Mittelalter. Ein Beitrag zur
    Wirtschafts- und Handelsgeschichte vornehmlich Süddeutschlands’, in
    *Vierteljahrsschrift für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte* 30
    (1937): 229–260.

[^26]: Markus Krajewski, ‘Ask Jeeves. Servants as Search Engines’, trans.
    Charles Marcrum, *Grey Room*38 (Winter 2010): 6-19.

[^27]: Woody Allen, ‘Nanny Dearest’, in Woody Allen, Mere Anarchy, New
    York: Random House, 2007, pp. 55-64.

[^28]: Johann Kaspar Riesbeck, *Briefe eines Reisenden Franzosen über
    Deutschland an seinen Bruder zu Paris*., vol. 1 s.l.: n.p., 1784,
    pp. 191-194.

[^29]: *Prager Wegweiser zum Unterricht und Bequemlichkeit der Fremden und
    Kenntniß der Einheimischen (…),* Prague: Betterl v. Wildenbrunn,
    1817, p 19: ‘Wenn derselbe {der Fremde, AT} von den Oertern, die er
    besuchen will, unterrichtet zu werden wünscht, so verwendet er sich
    an den Aufwärter des Gasthauses, insgemein Lehnlaquai genannt,
    welcher den Gast nach dem Bestimmungsorte begleitet. Dieser
    Lehnlaquai trifft auch Veranstaltung, damit der einkehrende Fremde
    mit allen Artikeln, die er verlangt, versehen würde.’

[^30]: Friedrich Nicolai, *Beschreibung einer Reise durch Deutschland und
    die Schweiz, im Jahre 1781,* Berlin-Stettin: n.p., 1783. Reprint:
    Hildesheim: Olms, 1994 (Collected Works 16, Edited by Bernhard
    Fabian and Marie-Luise Spieckermann), p. 142 et sequ.: ‘Wer also in
    einem grossen Haus jemand zu suchen hat, muß nur nach dem
    Hausmeister fragen, welcher alle Miethsleute kennet, die sich oft
    untereinander nicht kennen.’

[^31]: Konstanze Mittendorfer, *Biedermeier oder: Das Glück im Haus. Bauen
    und Wohnung in Wien und Berlin 1800-1850,* Wien: Verlag für
    Gesellschaftskritik, 1991, p. 146.

[^32]: [Joseph Richter], *Wienerische Musterkarte ein Beytrag zur
    Schilderung Wiens. 6 Stück,* Wien: n.p., 1785, pp. 7, 9: ‘Am
    unerträglichsten und gröbsten sind die Hausmeister, die zugleich
    Freunde, Rathgeber und Spione der Hausinspektoren und
    Administratoren sind, falls sie auch k.k. wären.’

[^33]: Peter Payer, *Hausmeister in Wien. Aufstieg und Niedergang einer
    Respektsperson,*Wien, 1996 (Wiener Geschichtsblätter Beihefte 1996,
    Nr. 4), p. 7: ‘über alle Vorkommnisse im Haus Bescheid zu wissen und
    dem Hausherrn im Bedarfsfall Meldung zu erstatten. Ihm waren alle
    Parteien persönlich bekannt, oft wußte er über eine Familie schon
    bevor sie einzog sämtliche privaten und beruflichen Verhältnisse’.

[^34]: For a concise overview on the history of libraries and their
    catalogs, see: Uwe Jochum, *Kleine Bibliotheksgeschichte,*
    Stuttgart: Reclam U-B 8915, 1993.

[^35]: Beat Kümin, ‘Drinking and Public Space in Early Modern German
    Lands’, in *Contemporary Drug Problems*, 32 (2005): 16-20.

[^36]: Susanne Rau and Gerd Schwerhoff, ‘Frühneuzeitliche
    Gasthaus-Geschichte(n) zwischen stigmatisierenden
    Fremdzuschreibungen und fragmentierten Geltungserzählungen’, in Gert
    Melville and Hans Vorländer (eds) *Geltungsgeschichten. Über die
    Stabilisierung und Legitimierung institutioneller Ordnungen,*
    Köln-Weimar-Wien: Böhlau, 2002, pp. 181, 186, 190, 199; Martin
    Scheutz, ‘‘hab ichs auch im würthshauß da und dort gehört [...]’
    Gaststätten als multifunktionale öffentliche Orte im 18.
    Jahrhundert’, in Martin Scheutz, Wolfgang Schmale, and Dana
    Štefanová (eds), *Orte des Wissens,* (Jahrbuch der österreichischen
    Gesellschaft zur Erforschung des 18. Jahrhunderts 18/19), Bochum:
    n.p., 2004, pp. 169-203.

[^37]: Quoted from: Hans Erich Bödeker, ‘Das Kaffeehaus als Institution
    aufklärerischer Geselligkeit’, in Étienne François (ed.)
    *Sociabilité et société bourgeoise en France, en Allemagne, et en
    Suisse, 1750-1850. Geselligkeit, Vereinswesen und bürgerliche
    Gesellschaft in Frankreich, Deutschland und der Schweiz,
    1750-1850,*Paris: Editions Recherche sur les Civilisations, 1986, p.
    72: ‘daß ein Cafféhaus gleichsam eine politische Börse sey, wo die
    wackersten und witzigsten Köpfe aus allen Ständen zusammenkommen’.

[^38]: 'Qui a esté le premier fait de L’Oeuf ou de la Poule?', in Eusèbe
    Renaudot (ed.) *Cinquiesme et dernier tome du Recueil général des
    questions traittées ès conférences du Bureau d’addresse (…),* Paris:
    Besogne, 1655, pp. 91-94.

[^39]: On Renaudot and his *Bureau d’adresse* see: Howard M. Solomon,
    *Public Welfare, Science and Propaganda in Seventeenth Century
    France: The Innovations of Théophraste Renaudot*. Princeton:
    Princeton University Press, 1972; Justin Stagl, *Eine Geschichte der
    Neugier*, pp. 175-187; Gilles Feyel, *L’Annonce et la nouvelle. La
    presse d’information en France sous l’ancien régime (1630-1788),*
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 11-308; Gérard Jubert
    (ed.) *Père des journalistes et médecin des pauvres. Théophraste
    Renaudot (1586 – 1653),* Paris: Champion, 2005.

[^40]: Henry Fielding, ‘A Plan of the Universal Register-Office’, in
    Bertrand A. Goldgar (ed.), pp. 201-230, 295-302.*The Covent-Garden
    Journal and A Plan of the Universal Register-Office*, Oxford:
    Clarendon Press, 1988, pp. 3-10; on this institution see also Miles
    Ogborn, *Spaces of Modernity. London’s Geographies 1680-1780*, New
    York/London: Guilford Press, 1998,

[^41]: See, http://www.google.com/corporate/.

[^42]: Fielding, ‘A Plan’, pp. 3-6.

[^43]: Ogborn, p. 217.*Spaces*,

[^44]: Ogborn, *Spaces*, pp. 219–221.

[^45]: Johann Pezzl, *Neueste Beschreibung von Wien,* 6th edition, Wien:
    Armbruster, n.d. (1822), p. 166: ‘Die Unternehmer [dieser Anstalt]
    geben, gegen das mäßige Honorar von 20. kr. bis zu 1 fl. Auskunft
    über hier sich aufhaltende In- und Ausländer, über Doctoren der
    Medicin und der Rechte, über Beamte, Gelehrte, Künstler tc., über
    das Locale und die Einrichtung öffentlicher Institute; über Behörden
    und Staatsbeamte; über alle Arten von Compagnie-Geschäften; über
    Darlehen auf Hypotheken und Waaren; über vorhandene Natur- und
    Kunstproducte für Käufer und Verkäufer; über Reisegelegenheiten;
    über Dienstgeber und Dienstsucher; über Käufe und Pachtungen von
    Häusern, Realitäten tc., über Wohnungen, Magazine, Stallungen,
    Fabriken tc., kurz, über alle bürgerliche und gesellschaftliche
    Geschäfte und Verhältnisse, welche zu wissen erlaubt ist.’

[^46]: [Adolph Bäuerle], *Briefe des jüngsten Eipeldauers an seinen Herrn
    Vettern in Kakran*, 5th issue, Wien: n.p. 1820, p. 230 et sequ.:
    ‘Von dem in Wien seit einiger Zeit, mit sehr vielem Glück
    bestehenden Auskunfts-Comptoir weiß ich auch ein Paar Anekdoten. Da
    ist nämlich die Tag ein ungarischer Heubauer hinkommen und hat
    g’sagt: ‚Meine Herren, möchte ich gern wissen, ob mein junges
    Weibel, während ich in Wien bin und mein Heu verkauf, mir in
    Ungerland treu ist! Gehen’s seyn’s so gut und schlagens einmal
    nach.’ Wieder ein anderer ist kommen, der gern hat wissen wollen, ob
    sein reicher Vetter in Günz heuer noch stirbt, und ihn, zum Erben
    einsetzt. O mein Herr Vetter, wann die Herren in dem Comptoir lauter
    solche Sachen auffinden könnten, sie müßten noch mehr zu thun
    bekommen. Ich z.B. ließ mir aufschlagen, ob das Publikum mit mir
    recht lang zufrieden seyn, und ob der Eipeldauer immer mehr und mehr
    Leser bekommen wird’.

[^47]: Anke te Heesen, *Der Zeitungsausschnitt. Ein Papierobjekt der
    Moderne,* Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, 2006.

[^48]: Fyodor Dostoyevsky, *Demons*, trans. Richard Pevear and Larissa
    Volkhonsky, New York: Vintage Classics, 1995 (1872), p. 128f.

[^49]: Anke te Heesen, *Der Zeitungsausschnitt*, pp. 78-80.

[^50]: P.A., ‘Herr der tausend Scheren. Der Letzte der Romeikes,
    Zeitungsausschnitt’, in *Sammlung Feldhaus*, Akten 7253, I.
    Depositum 40 Feldhaus, Blatt 1-3; my thanks to Anke te Heesen for
    giving me access to photocopies; the source given by te Heesen, p 82
    et sequ. – *Daheim* 36 (1899/1900), no 28, p. 22 et sequ. – is
    unfortunately erroneous.

[^51]: Abraham Pradel, (= Nicolas de Blegny), *Les Adresses de la Ville de
    Paris avec le Tresor des Almanachs. Livre Commode En tous lieux, en
    tous temps, & en toutes conditions,* Paris: n.p., 1691; Reprint of
    the 2nd edition 1692: Abraham du Pradel (= Nicolas de Blegny), *Le
    livre commode des adresses de Paris pour 1692,* Édouard Fournier
    (ed.) Vol. 1-2, Paris: Paul Daffis, 1878. Digitized version:
    http://gallica2.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k27823x and
    http://gallica2.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k278248; Volker Bauer,
    ‘Herrschaftsordnung, Datenordnung, Suchoptionen.
    Recherchemöglichkeiten in Staatskalendern und Staatshandbüchern des
    18. Jahrhunderts’, in Thomas Brandstetter et al. (eds), *Vor
    Google*, pp. 85–108; for a bibliography on the Red Cross Tracing
    Service compiled by three students in my seminar ‘Digitale Medien in
    der Geschichtswissenschaft. Suchmaschinen im analogen Zeitalter’
    during the winter term of 2008/09, see:
    http://www.univie.ac.at/igl.geschichte/tantner/wiki
    /index.php?title=Suchdienst\_des\_Roten\_Kreuz.

[^52]: This was the case for the poet François Colletet’s short-lived
    Bureau d’adresse: Quatorzième Journal et Suite des Avis et des
    Affaires de Paris. [29.10.1676], in: *Le Journal de Colletet,
    premier Petit journal parisien (1676)*. Supplement to: *Le Moniteur
    du Bibliophile. Gazette littéraire, anecdotique et curieuse*,
    1.1878, p. 201.

[^53]: Mercedes Bunz, ‘Sozial 2.0: Herr, Knecht, Feind, Freund. Soziale
    Netzwerke und die Ökonomie der Freundschaft’, in *De:Bug.
    Elektronische Lebensaspekte* 120 (11 March 2008),
    http://de-bug.de/mag/5422.html, short version reprinted in: *analyse
    & kritik*, 541 (21 August 2009): 14.



