##Dominating Search: Google Before the Law

##Angela Daly

For many, particularly in the Anglophone world and Western Europe, it
may be obvious that Google has a monopoly over online search and
advertising and that this is an undesirable state of affairs, due to
Google’s ability to mediate information flows online. The baffling
question may be why governments and regulators are doing little to
nothing about this situation, given the increasingly pivotal importance
of the internet and free flowing communications in our lives. However,
the law concerning monopolies, namely antitrust or competition law,
works in what may be seen as a less intuitive way by the general
public.[^1] Monopolies themselves are not illegal.
Conduct that is unlawful, i.e. abuses of that market power, is defined
by a complex set of rules and revolves principally around economic harm
suffered due to anticompetitive behavior. However the effect of
information monopolies over search, such as Google’s, is more than just
economic, yet competition law does not address this. Furthermore,
Google’s collection and analysis of user data and its portfolio of
related services make it difficult for others to compete. Such a
situation may also explain why Google’s established search rivals, Bing
and Yahoo, have not managed to provide services that are as effective or
popular as Google’s own. Users, however, are not entirely powerless.
Google’s business model rests, at least partially, on them – especially
the data collected about them. If they stop using Google, then Google is
nothing.

###The Case Against Google

Google has been challenged on both sides of the northern Atlantic
through competition investigations into the operation of its online
search and advertising business. Complaints of anticompetitive behavior
came from Google’s ‘vertical’ search engine competitors. Vertical search
engines focus on a specific part of online content, e.g.
price-comparison sites, and sites offering legal and medical
information. In addition to its ‘generic’ search engine, Google also
runs its own vertical services such as Google Maps, Google Flight
Search, and the mobile application Google Shopper. Google’s vertical
competitors alleged that Google was using its dominant position in
online generic search and advertising to give it an unfair advantage in
these other markets, specifically by giving its vertical services higher
and more prominent places in its generic search results, while lowering
the ‘Quality Score’ of competitors’ sponsored links. This practice would
make users more likely to click on Google’s services rather than its
competitors’ vertical search services.

####Google’s Dominance

Google is certainly the most prominent of the search engines in Europe
and the US; it is the market leader in the overall European market for
online search, based on either proportion of searches that are conducted
through Google (for no cost to users) or its proportional share of
advertising revenue (which is where Google gets its
funds).[^2] The company’s market share in Europe is
around 90 percent,[^3] which would be classified as
‘near monopoly’ according to the Commission’s past practice. Google’s
online search and advertising is also the market leader in the US, but
with a lesser market share of around 80 percent, though this is still
enough to be considered a dominant position.[^4]

However, Google does have competition from other general search engines
offered by Bing and Yahoo, as well as subject-specific vertical search
engines. Google itself likes to claim when on the defensive from
allegations that it operates an abusive monopoly, that its competitors
are only a click away. While the search engine market in the U.S. and
Europe was competitive in the 1990s and into the early 2000s, it is now
massively more consolidated and concentrated around Google.

Google emerged as the market leader because of its early innovations in
providing better search service than its rivals. The company did this
first by developing a more sophisticated search algorithm that relied on
reputation (measured by links from other pages to that page) and text
matching to provide the most relevant results, and second by building on
its growing experience with search to deliver even more relevant
advertising through paid results. [^5] Google’s
operation also involved the accumulation of data about user searches in
order to improve the accuracy of its search function: the more data
collected, the more accurate its searches became. As a result, the
collection, analysis, and sale of user data form a barrier to entry for
any potential competitors and entrench Google’s position as the leading
search engine. In other words, Google’s possession and contextualization
of user data put it far ahead of any potential rivals starting a new
search engine. This advantage makes it more difficult to compete with
Google, since a company would need similar knowledge in order to do so.
A further barrier to entry for potential competitors is the large
investment in hardware, software, and connection capacity required by
the creation and maintenance of a search . [^6] In
addition, Google has built up a portfolio of related products and
services from which it also harvests user data for its search business.
[^7]

####The Competition Investigations

The European Commission opened its investigation into Google in November
2010 for an alleged abuse of its dominant position contrary to Art 102
TFEU.[^8] This case is the largest and most significant
competition investigation into Google to date. At the time of writing
the Commission and Google appear to have reached a settlement in the
wake of various proposals from Google that were rejected by the
Commission. In the US, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) launched an
antitrust investigation into Google’s activities, including search and
advertising, which resulted in a settlement with Google in early 2013.

The European Commission investigation was launched in 2010 after
complaints were received from Google’s competitors – price comparison
site Foundem, ejustice.fr (a French legal search engine) and German
shopping site Ciao (owned by Microsoft) – that Google was treating them
unfavorably in its search results (both ‘organic’ or unpaid results, and
the ‘sponsored’ or paid results), and was discriminating in favor of its
own services. More specifically, there were allegations that Google had
both lowered the rank of the unpaid search results of services,
particularly vertical search engines that compete with Google, and had
accorded preferential placement to the results of its own versions of
these services. [^9] Furthermore, Google is alleged to
have lowered the ‘Quality Score’ for the sponsored links of these
competing vertical search engines (the Quality Score influences the
likelihood that an ad will be displayed by Google and the ranking of
that ad in the search results, and is a factor determining the price
paid by advertisers to Google). In 2012, the Commission issued a
communication inviting Google to offer its commitment to remedy the
Commission’s concerns about anticompetitive behavior, including what the
Commission perceived as the potential preferential treatment that Google
Search gave its own vertical search services compared to the vertical
search competitors.

The saga between Google and the Commission has been lengthy and drawn
out. The Commission has twice rejected offers from Google to change its
behavior before accepting the current proposal in early 2014. It has
always been in Google’s interests to reach a settlement with the
Commission since otherwise the Commission would proceed with a
full-blown investigation, quite probably resulting in the imposition of
remedies as well as a large fine (up to 10 percent of global turnover).

Google’s first proposal to the Commission in early 2013 to remedy its
behavior seemed to include an offer to label its own services in search
results in order to distinguish them from competitors’ results and to
provide links to rival services. The Commission rejected these proposals
in July 2013. Indeed, Foundem called Google’s initial offer to the
Commission ‘half-hearted’ because it did not address the deeper problem
of how Google determined the ‘relevance’ of links to search queries,
especially when its competitors’ services were
involved.[^10]

The second, supposedly confidential, proposal from Google came later in
2013 (whose content was leaked on an American consumer rights
group).[^11] This version seemed to involve Google
offering to label its own services when one or other of them was
displayed in the results page in case a user did a generic search for
particular terms. The label should be ‘accessible to users via a clearly
visible icon’, should show that this result has been added by Google in
order to ensure that users would not confuse it with generic search
results and should indicate to users where they can find alternatives
provided by Google’s competitors. The result from Google’s own service
should be displayed in a separate area to Google’s generic search
results and Google also offered to display links to three rival services
in ‘a manner to make users clearly aware of these alternatives’. These
rivals’ services would be selected from a pool of eligible vertical
search competitors according to a complicated process set out in the
document. Google included screenshots of how these results would be
displayed, which included links to competitors being displayed under its
own specialized search results in a separately boxed part of the screen
and taking up roughly half of the space on the page that Google’s
specialized service results occupied.

In response to Google’s offer, FairSearch (a lobby group comprising many
of Google’s search rivals) commissioned a survey with the aim of finding
the likely impact of these proposals on actual internet users, in
particular testing the extent to which users were likely to click on any
of the three rival links and whether they understood and recognized the
different parts of Google’s proposed search results page i.e. the
labeling and descriptions.[^12] The survey found that
‘only a modest number’ of users would click on one of the rival links
and that users were confused about the difference between Google’s
vertical search results and the other results.[^13]
The conclusion was that if Google presented links to its rivals in a
relatively neutral fashion i.e. in a comparable way in terms of
appearance and placement on the page, then this would result in higher
click through rates for the competitors’ links. However, the Second
Commitments offered by Google did not achieve this and so were not
‘likely to command materially increased consumer attention or restore
competition for [Google’s] rivals’.[^14]

The head of a consumer advocacy group, BEUC, also condemned the second
commitments proposal as ‘not just inadequate to solve consumer
detriment, but […] in fact self-serving’ since they continued to
‘marginalize concerns’ and ‘bizarrely’ suggested a new revenue stream
for Google, since certain competitors would have to bid in a separate
auction to be included as one of the rival links
displayed.[^15]

In the end, the European Commission again rejected Google’s offer. The
third and final offer made by Google at the time of writing, which the
Commission appears to have accepted at least tentatively, comprises
Google informing users via a label that Google’s own specialized
services are promoted, separating them from the other search results in
order to make clear the difference between them and ‘normal’ results and
displaying ‘prominent’ links to three rival specialized search services
from a pool of ‘eligible competitors’, and showing clearly to users in a
‘comparable’ way to how Google displays its own
services.[^16] On the occasions where Google does not
charge for inclusion in its specialized search results, it will also not
charge its rivals for inclusion as rival links and here will select them
using its ‘normal’ web search algorithm. But for those services for
which Google does charge for inclusion, the three rivals will be chosen
via an auction from a pool of eligible competitors.

The Commission includes screenshots of how Google’s services will change
as a result of the commitments. When results from Google’s specialized
Shopping service are displayed in the results page, they are done so at
the top of the page in a box headed ‘Google Shopping results’ and
directly adjacent to the right of this box is one of the same size
labeled ‘Alternatives’, with a shaded background, displaying results
from some of Google’s vertical search rivals. Google Shopping is a
service for which Google charges for inclusion, and so the rivals whose
results will be displayed will be selected via the auction mechanism.

[IMG1]

("Fig. 1. Google’s specialized Shopping service. Source: European
Commission.")

This would go further towards the ‘parity of appearance and placement’
that the Fairsearch-commission consumer research found increased
consumers’ likelihood of clicking on Google’s rivals’ results, although
the research also found that the result to the furthest left on the
screen was the more likely to be clicked on than those to the
right.[^17] If this research goes some way to
reflecting accurately how European internet users in general behave,
then this formulation of the results page should see an increase in
clicks on rivals’ results but Google’s specialized service results will
still have the more attractive position.

The other screenshot from the Commission includes results from Google’s
Local Search service, for which Google does not charge a payment for
inclusion and so the rivals whose results will be displayed will be
selected using Google’s general search algorithm.

[IMG2]

("Fig. 2. Google’s Local Search service. Source: European Commission.")

Here, the layout is somewhat different, with the rivals’ results placed
at the top of the page but in a much smaller shaded area than Google’s
own specialized search results, which are also less clearly labeled.
While the rivals’ results might be thought to be in a better position,
at the top of the page, their reduced size may well make them less
attractive for users’ clicks. This scenario does not seem to be
addressed directly in the FairSearch commission and so it is unclear as
to how users would react to this in practice.

The procedure now is that the Commission will contact those who made the
complaints about Google’s conduct, state the Commission’s views and ask
for their feedback. While the Commission will consider these comments
before it takes a final decision on Google’s proposal, it seems unlikely
that they will change the Commission’s mind. Unlike Google’s first two
proposals, it seems that this third one will not be subject to a
rigorous ‘market test’, during which interested third parties can offer
their opinions and research, such as the FairSearch survey evidence
mentioned above. This is significant since it seems that the results of
the market test of Google’s previous proposals contributed to the
Commission’s decisions not to accept them.

If this agreement does become legally binding, then Google will not have
to pay a fine running into billions of euros and will escape an official
finding of wrongdoing. Its previous conduct will also not officially be
termed anticompetitive, which can have value as a precedent in future
investigations. Perhaps an even greater victory for Google will be that
it does not have to reveal to the public any more information about how
its secretive algorithm works, although it may have to pass on some
information about it to the independent monitoring trustee who will
assist the Commission in making sure Google implements its commitments
properly.

Google’s competitors thus far have expressed their unhappiness with the
proposed settlement. The Initiative for a Competitive Online Marketplace
(ICOMP), an umbrella group of competitors, said that without another
market test of the proposals, the Commission’s head of competition
Joaquin Almunia ‘risks having the wool pulled over his eyes by
Google’.[^18] However Almunia himself has emphasized
that his mission is to protect competition for the benefit of European
consumers, not competitors, and that this proposal strikes the right
balance between allowing Google to improve its services and giving users
a ‘real choice between different options’.[^19]

####Federal Trade Commission (FTC)

In the U.S., the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) also conducted an
antitrust investigation into Google and came to a very different
conclusion to that of the European Commission; it found that Google had
adopted design changes for its search results page (it displayed its own
vertical search results more prominently and had the effect of pushing
the organic search links further down the page) primarily to improve the
quality of its search product and the overall user
experience.[^20] Although Google’s vertical search
competitors may have lost sales as a result of this improvement, in the
FTC’s eyes this was just a normal part of a fierce, competitive process,
and the outcome for users was that there was more directly relevant
information for their search queries. So the FTC found that Google had
not acted anti-competitively, and the company was not forced to label
its results or otherwise change the operation or format of its search
results page.

Indeed, the FTC may also have found it legally difficult to insist on
such changes. Certain constitutional rights in the U.S. are also enjoyed
by ‘legal persons’ such as corporations as well as ‘natural persons’
(i.e. real individual people), including the right to freedom of
expression under the First Amendment, as can be seen in the highly
controversial Supreme Court decision in *Citizens
United*.[^21] Search engines including Google may be
considered to be ‘speakers’ for the purposes of First Amendment
protection, given they make ‘editorial judgements’ about information
akin to a newspaper, with the implication that the government is not
able to regulate what is presented by Google in its search results nor
the way in which it is presented.[^22] If the FTC had
tried to impose regulations in this way, then Google may claim that it
would be unconstitutional and thus illegal for them to do so.

####The Users’ Perspective

In any event, aside from how users might see and act on information in
Google’s search results pages, the perspective of users vis-à-vis a
private, unaccountable, dominant online gatekeeper has not really been
addressed at all so far in the competition investigations’ narrow focus.

The problem that users may have with search engines is one of access to
information: a search engine is a portal through which users experience
the web. If a user does a search, and information thought of as
‘relevant’ does not appear in the results page, and if the search engine
has had an active role in ensuring that information does not appear,
then this can be characterized as censorship of sorts. Furthermore, even
if certain information said to be ‘relevant’ or ‘very relevant’ is not
entirely blocked from the results pages, but does not appear on the
first page or even on the first five pages, then it may effectively be
unavailable to users who generally will not go beyond these first few
pages of results. [^23] In a competitive market,
according to neoclassical economic theory, when a search engine does not
provide a user with the results she is seeking, that user will switch to
a competitor that does provide these results. However, if the market for
search engines is dominated by one entity or a small group of entities,
then the user may not be able to obtain the results she wants even by
switching to a competitor. [^24] Her searches will be
restricted either according to the economic interests or the ideological
bearing of the dominant player(s). Indeed, Google has been accused of
bias in how it presents its search results, [^25] and
there has been some evidence that it has taken steps to censor search
terms. [^26] However, one result of the competition
investigations into Google is that very little has been revealed about
its secretive website-ranking algorithm, so users are still in the dark
about exactly how Google conducts its searches.

A further problem that users face regards the company’s collection and
use of data about them. Indeed, invasions of privacy and lack of
compliance with data protection standards have been recognized in the
American context as exacerbated by concentrated search markets, since
consumers are left without meaningful choices given few or no
competitors.[^27]

###Competition Law: Could Do Better?

The result of the two investigations has been that in Europe, Google
seems to have abused its dominant position regarding how it displays
search results (although there is no official finding of wrongdoing),
while in the U.S. Google’s same conduct was found to be within the bounds
of the law and, as mentioned above, possibly protected by First
Amendment rights.

Indeed, it is actually unclear whether Google was acting
anticompetitively and abusing its dominant position in the E.U.. Aside
from Google’s incentives to come to an agreement with the Commission,
the Commission may have been motivated to settle with Google for the
reason that if it conducted a full investigation, it may not have come
to the conclusion that there was anticompetitive conduct, and even if it
did, Google could have appealed that decision to the European courts,
which might well not have agreed with the Commission. This is because
Google’s conduct in favoring its own subsidiary services over those of
its rivals does not fit squarely into recognized categories of
anticompetitive abuses of dominance. It is not a straightforward case of
‘refusal to deal’ or ‘refusal to supply’ since Google is not refusing to
deal or supply: it is ‘dealing’ with its competitors, but not on the
terms they want. It is not blocking them entirely from its search
results, whether paid or unpaid, it is just not placing them as highly
and prominently as they wish to be placed. Furthermore, while certain
types of discriminatory conduct by dominant entities have been found to
constitute abuses of dominance, there seems to be no general duty not to
discriminate against competitors on neighboring markets, and again it is
unclear that Google’s conduct is analogous to the cases where such
abusive discrimination has been found to exist.[^28]
Furthermore, it is unclear whether Google’s conduct fulfills the
conditions for an abuse of dominance in the form of bundling and tying:
Google certainly does ‘bundle’ its services i.e. its generic search
engine and its vertical search engines, such that the former displays
the latter in its results for a particular search term, but some
conditions for finding this conduct abusive seem not to be met. Finally,
the *effects* of Google’s conduct are not definitively excluding
competition: indeed, many of these competitors are still very much alive
and kicking more than three years after they started to complain about
Google’s behavior.[^29]

The Commission is empowered to take actions that can radically change
the way businesses operate if it makes an official finding of abusive
conduct, such as obliging certain kinds of business practices vis-à-vis
competitors and customers, or even breaking up an entity into smaller
constituent parts in extreme circumstances. In contrast, the terms of
the agreement with Google are somewhat weak by comparison. Google will
have to make some changes to the layout and content of its results page,
but it will not seemingly have to be a lot more transparent about its
inner machinations, nor will a general obligation of non-discrimination
be imposed on Google, which were possible remedies during the
investigation. [^30] More transparency in particular
around how Google’s search algorithm works and an obligation of
non-discrimination could have had positive consequences for more
user-centric concerns: if the Commission had taken measures to force
Google to reveal more details about its algorithm, then this would have
been important for users as well as Google’s competitors since they
would have a lot more understanding of the hitherto secret way in which
Google operates.

In comparison, the U.S. FTC did not force Google to make any changes to
its search results page, since it did not find that Google had acted
anticompetitively or abused its dominant position. Instead, the FTC
found Google’s design changes had improved its search function for
consumers. This follows a line of U.S. case law including Kodak
[^31] and IBM , [^32] which suggest
that new and innovative products from the dominant entity that
disadvantage competitors do not necessarily constitute abuses of the
dominant position. Since this conduct was not viewed as anticompetitive,
there could be no possibility of remedies for anticompetitive behavior
having a positive ‘spillover’ effect for user-centric concerns.

These outcomes from both sides of the Atlantic may seem rather
disappointing given the problems, identified above, that a dominant
search engine such as Google poses for users. However, competition law
is not designed to deal with all of these problems, even when they seem
to flow from a concentrated market, and even when it would seem that
more competition may solve or at least lessen the problem.

First, contemporary competition law’s basis in neoclassical economics –
due to the influence of the Chicago School of Economics in the U.S. since
the 1970s and the subsequent move in the E.U. towards the ‘more economic
approach’ in competition law and policy – has produced a legal regime
that is concerned with the idea of competition as efficiency, with the
maximization of ‘consumer welfare’ as its objective. The maximization of
consumer welfare seems to trump the promotion of competition in a
market, resulting in a consequentialist approach to certain situations
of (near) monopoly along with finding aggressive conduct towards
competitors acceptable so long as the prices consumers pay are low or
zero, as this is believed to be in their best interests. Indeed, as
mentioned above, the European Commission’s head of competition
emphasized that he was operating within this precise approach when he
described his mission as protecting competition for the benefit of
consumers, not competitors. For some time in both E.U. and U.S. law, it
has been established that the ‘mere’ accumulation of market power even
up to the situation of monopoly is not in itself illegal. This can be
contrasted with the past, when competition law was open to other public
policy considerations that come about from the accumulation of private
power, such as the effect it might have on the democratic process, a
concern both of the German ordoliberals and U.S. antitrust law before the
Second World War.

Second, and related to its current neoclassical incarnation, is the
difficulty that competition law’s economic approach has with quantifying
other valuable societal goals, including vis-à-vis consumer welfare,
which has resulted in them being left out of the analysis
altogether.[^33] **** SStucke, for instance, believes
that competition policy can go beyond promoting economic efficiency,
dispersing economic and political power, and promoting individual
freedom. [^34] He argues for a ‘blended approach’ to
competition goals, yet does not explain very adequately what this would
mean across the board of competition investigations and issues. His
point seems simply to be a different interpretation of economic policy
objectives in the scope of competition law, such as protecting small and
medium businesses. In any event, it is true that competition law, as a
regime that operates using mainly quantitative data, is not so
well-equipped to take into account more qualitative factors. Measuring
the extent to which, for instance, Google’s users experience
non-economic harm would seem to be a more qualitative than quantitative
exercise, and generally one that would not be measured in financial
terms. For non-economic objectives, it may be more expedient to use law
and policy aside from competition law to achieve them, since using
competition law to do so can be costly and
ineffective.[^35] Competition law has a particular
ideology and aim that may not be conceptually flexible enough to bend to
these situations.

In any event, this conception of competition law, based on principles of
neoclassical economics seeing competition as efficiency with the
objective of maximizing consumer welfare, may no longer reflect
practice. Indeed, Buch-Hansen and Wigger have argued that at least in
the E.U., competition regulation has undergone a ‘neoliberal
transformation’ that has been primarily in the interests of
transnational globalized capital rather than other social groups,
challenging the view that it is consumers who are the main beneficiaries
of competition.[^36] Furthermore, in the US, one
empirical study suggests that antitrust policy did not actually improve
consumer welfare in practice.[^37]

However, this is somewhat hard to square with the Commission’s action
against Google, since surely its investigation seems definitely not to
be in the interests of the transnational globalized capital that Google
constitutes. In addition, the Commission’s willingness to intervene and
even push for changes to Google’s business practices when it is
debatable that Google is behaving in an anticompetitive way would also
not seem to accord with an approach minimalizing intervention in markets
that neoliberalism promotes. Indeed, it seems that the Commission may
have gone beyond what is ‘necessary’ or the bare minimum to address
competition concerns. While neoliberal thought has been a dominant
political current in the U.S. and U.K. at least since the 1980s, and has
made inroads into the rest of the European Union, it would seem that the
Commission’s conduct here cannot wholly be attributed to it, and may
possibly be due to factors such as European protectionism when faced
with an American corporation (yet some of Google’s competitors which
have been making the complaints are also American) or being seen as a
relevant institution to the general public and act in the face of what
they perceive as a monopoly. Nevertheless, it is clear that the
Commission has not been overly ‘invasive’ of Google’s business
practices, and particularly those which hold the most concern for users.

###Can Other Areas of Law Help?

Although competition law seems inadequate for properly addressing the
issues created by Google’s dominant position for users, there are other
areas of law that may go some way to alleviate these problems. First
merger control, another ‘head’ of competition law that blocks
transactions resulting in anticompetitive outcomes, could have been used
more effectively to prevent Google from accumulating power through
certain takeovers of other companies. Some of these mergers resulted in
Google buying companies whose additional services were integrated with
its existing business, becoming the object of the Commission’s
investigation of Google for abusing its dominant position. However the
practice of the American and European merger authorities, especially
when it comes to vertical or conglomerate mergers, has not been
particularly circumspect. The U.S. merger authorities have been
specifically criticized for being too lenient with this kind of merger
as well as the resulting concentrations in technology and communications
markets. [^38] The European Commission’s
non-horizontal merger guidelines from 2008 have also been termed
‘hospitable’ to non-horizontal concentrations.[^39]
Buch-Hansen and Wigger singled out European merger control in particular
as having taken the neoliberal turn in the interests of transnational
capital rather than European consumers. So it is difficult to have much
faith that it will address Google’s dominance as a leading ambassador of
globalized technological capitalism.

Some of the privacy and data protection concerns around Google’s
activities in Europe could at least be addressed using the European data
protection regime, which is in the process of being updated from its
1995 version to reflect current technological reality. Regarding user
data in the data protection regulation, there has been an attempt to
include an obligation by companies to obtain the affirmative consent of
individual users before profiling them. However there has been a great
amount of resistance from online industry groups towards including such
a term, with Google named as one of the companies lobbying against
it.[^40] Although in the U.S. there is growing
regulatory activism around privacy and data protection, the approach
taken is largely self-regulatory, with privacy activists actually
appealing to the antitrust regime to intervene when dominant entities
infringe on privacy. If the antitrust regime does not uphold their
privacy in practice, then the limited privacy regime already in place is
unlikely to help. Aside from the FTC’s cognizance of the limits of its
legal authority in this area, Pasquale has also identified the
conceptual limits of competition law (at least in the US) to govern
‘dominant’ search engines, such as the fact that economics-based,
consumer welfare-oriented competition analysis cannot deal properly with
*inter alia* privacy concerns.[^41]

With regards to information access and privacy more generally and the
role search engines play, the human/constitutional rights legal regimes
could be called on to aid users. However, the protection of free
expression (sometimes encompassing access to information as well) in
Europe and the U.S. contained in the European Convention on Human Rights
(ECHR) and the First Amendment to the Constitution, respectively, are
usually enforceable as rights against the government and public bodies,
though not against private entities such as corporations. Indeed, as
mentioned earlier, in the U.S. corporations such as Google actually enjoy
the protection of the First Amendment themselves. Human/constitutional
rights mainly operate to prohibit government interference with citizens’
rights but are largely impotent against infringements by companies or
other non-public organizations. Moreover, American protection for the
right to privacy (under the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution) is
weaker and would seem to apply to less circumstances than the European
position in the ECHR.

The Council of Europe has turned its attention to search engines, and in
April 2012 its Committee of Ministers adopted a Recommendation to Member
States concerning the protection and promotion of respect for human
rights regarding search engines.[^42] The non-binding
recommendation recognizes the potential challenges of search engines to
the right of freedom of expression (Art 10 of the ECHR) and the right to
a private life (Art 8), which may come from the design of algorithms,
de-indexing, and/or partial treatment or biased results, concentration
in the market, a lack of transparency about how results are selected and
ranked, the ability of search engines to gather and index content that
may not have been intended for mass communication, general data
processing and retention, and the generation of new kinds of personal
data such as individual search histories and behavioral profiles. The
recommendation, of course, is not legally binding, and it merely
constitutes suggestions for the Member States to follow, if they see
fit. Thus far it does not seem that the recommendation has actually been
followed by Member States, and adequate protection of privacy and
facilitation of free expression remain a problem for privately-owned and
operated platforms like Google.

Prior or *ex ante* regulation of search engines is another possibility,
especially if the legal regimes above do not adequately address user
concerns. Various commentators have recommended *ex ante* regulation as
well as, or else appeal to these other legal regimes. In Europe, the
Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers advocated a co-regulatory
approach to search engines. Member States should cooperate with the
private sector and civil society to develop strategies to protect
fundamental rights and freedoms pertaining to search engine operation,
particularly regarding transparency over how the search engines provide
information, the criteria according to which search results are
organized, how content not intended for mass communication (although in
the public space) should be ranked and indexed, transparency as to the
collection of personal data, empowerment of users to access and modify
their personal data held by search engine providers, the minimization of
the collection and processing of personal data, and the assurance that
search engine services are accessible to people with disabilities.
Member States should also consider offering users a choice of search
engines, particularly to search outputs based on criteria of public
value. However, as mentioned above, Member States so far have not acted
on this recommendation, and as it stands the recommendation is also
non-binding.

In the U.S. context, specifically given the limits of competition law to
deal with privacy concerns, Pasquale argues that search engines should
instead be thought of as an ‘essential cultural and political facility’
and regulated accordingly, using tools beyond competition
law,[^43] alongside other measures he has previously
advocated for that relate to the increased regulation of search engines
(such as protection for users’ privacy and greater transparency over how
search results are ordered).[^44]

In order to deal with issues related to the use and exploitation of user
data, Fuchs has taken a radical position and argued that as a solution,
Google should not be dissolved, alternatives are not needed, and its
services are not ‘a danger to humanity’.[^45] Instead
he advocates that Google be ‘expropriated and transformed into a public,
non-profit, non-commercial organization that serves the common good’. He
outlines what this public search engine could look like, including a
non-profit organization such as a university running its services, and
support by public funding. Interestingly, Vaidhyanathan has previously
identified Google as remedying what he terms ‘public failures’ i.e. the
opposite of a ‘market failure’, when the state cannot satisfy public
needs and deliver services effectively. Google has ‘stepped into voids
better filled by the public sector’.[^46] Aside from
the fact that this is highly unlikely to happen in practice given the
enormous ‘intervention’ in the market that such ‘expropriation’ of
Google would entail, Fuchs also notes that this may only be possible by
‘establishing a commons-based internet in a commons-based society’; this
has particular resonance in the wake of the revelations of vast
public/state surveillance of the internet. It would seem that internet
users will only be safe in cyberspace when there is no concentration of
power in one entity, whether public or private, and relations are
governed on a peer-to-peer basis.

Furthermore, regulation similar to that advocated for Internet Service
Providers (ISPs) in the net neutrality debate has been suggested for
search engines, including Google. Interestingly, Google itself was an
early advocate of net neutrality regulation for ISPs, before ‘modifying’
its position on the issue in 2010. An equivalent obligation of Google’s
might encompass non-discrimination rules for its search results, as well
as requiring Google not to ‘block’ content that would otherwise be
considered a ‘relevant’ result for a search. However, without knowing
more about how Google’s search algorithm works and how ‘neutral’ or not
it already is in determining results, it would be difficult to design
such an obligation of neutrality then see that it is effectively put
into place. With ISPs it is easier to determine whether they are acting
in a non-neutral fashion due to their technical makeup.

Nevertheless, despite these varied suggestions for law and regulation to
deal with Google’s dominance, given the imperfect solutions offered (at
most) by competition law, there has been no attempt to implement any of
them.

This inaction may be explained by the regulatory climate in the U.S. and
Europe. The regulation of communications in both jurisdictions operates
according to a mostly ‘market-based’ approach, which, as mentioned
above, has reflected the ascendancy of neoliberalism and its
corresponding doctrine of ‘light touch’ regulation of private entities.
Alongside this development, there has been the attempted capture by
corporate interests of public regulatory bodies. A glaring example is
the aforementioned corporate lobbying of European institutions during
the legislative process for a new data protection regulation. This has
resulted in governments of liberal democracies being loathe in practice
to extend any further regulation of private entities, especially for
seemingly ‘non-economic’ purposes, in accordance with the mantra that
the market will provide. The legislative and regulatory solutions
outlined above would entail significant intervention and ‘interference’
with the market for online search and advertising. Given the general
environment, it is not surprising that these solutions for Google’s
dominance may be thought of as idealistic or going too far.

Even if the will did exist to regulate in users’ interests, another
issue remains: the time it takes for law and regulation to be discussed,
enacted, then implemented, which is at odds with the high speed of new
technological markets that govern online search and advertising.

###Extra-Legal Solutions

Since the law and regulation, for various reasons listed above, seem
inadequate, extra-legal solutions may be the most appropriate for
search. One suggestion has been for a publicly funded search engine that
would compete with Google and its ilk. This solution is advocated for by
Pasquale as a real alternative to those already in operation, as a means
to avoid problems with monitoring and accountability that private search
engines pose. As described above, Fuchs advocated for government
intervention to turn Google into a public search engine, while also
admitting that a non-exploitative search engine for the benefit of
humanity may only be possible through the general establishment of a
commons-based internet in a commons-based society.

Nevertheless, users themselves are not entirely powerless towards search
engines and do not need to wait for top-down direction. Even in
scenarios where users create information for corporate expropriation,
there is a weakness inasmuch as the corporations cannot force users to
utilize the services and thus contribute their data. Consent is
dependent on users’ own views and motivations. Since the users and the
data they produce become the ‘product’ of the company, then ‘the
corporation is in many ways at the mercy of users [... and] the
community of users is more empowered in the face of the
corporation’.[^47] This suggests that if users, on
whom Google’s whole business model rests (at least partially anyway),
realized their potential by going on ‘strike’ and shutting down their
accounts, or refused to use Google’s service and thus create data for
Google, then they could avoid and successfully resist these exploitative
practices.

A final option for users would be to support and use decentralized
peer-to-peer search engines such as YaCy, avoiding centralized servers
along with the problems they entail.[^48] However, the
success of such peer-to-peer search engines is dependent upon the amount
of people using it ‘actively’ by contributing to the website index. Next
to that, these search engines cannot constantly update the quality of
search by accessing data to improve their results as Google does, so
their results are likely to be less ‘accurate’ or ‘relevant’.

###References

Almunia, Joaquin. ‘Statement on the Google investigation’ European
Commission SPEECH/14/93, 5 February 2014.

Berkley Photo v Eastman Kodak, 444 US 1093 (1980).

Buch-Hansen, Hubert and Angela Wigger. *The Politics of European
Competition Regulation: A Critical Political Economy Perspective*,
Abingdon and New York: Routledge, 2011.

California Computer Products v International Business Machines, 613 F.2d
727 (1979).

Cave, Martin and Howard Peter Williams. ‘Google and European
Competition Law’, TPRC The 39th Research Conference on Communication,
Information and Internet Policy, Arlington VA, 23-25 September 2011,
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_id=1992974.

Citizens United v Federal Election Commission, 558 US 310 (2010).

Council of Europe, ‘Recommendation CM/Rec(2012)3 of the Committee of
Ministers to Member States on the Protection of Human Rights with Regard
to Search Engines’, 4 April 2012,
https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1929429&Site=CM.

Crandall, Robert W. and Clifford Winston. ‘Does Antitrust Policy
Improve Consumer Welfare? Assessing the Evidence’, *Journal of Economic
Perspectives* 17 (.4) (2003): 3-26.

Devine, Kristine, L. ‘Preserving Competition in Multi-Sided Innovative
Markets: How Do You Solve A Problem Like Google?’, *North Carolina
Journal of Law and Technology*10 (2009).

Edelman, Ben. ‘Hard-Coding Bias in Google Algorithmic Search Results’,
15 November 2010, http://www.benedelman.org/hardcoding/.

EDRi, ‘US Privacy Groups Believe US Officials Lobby to Weaken EU
Privacy’, 13 February 2013,
http://www.edri.org/edrigram/number11.3/us-privacy-groups-eu-law-lobby.

European Commission, ‘Antitrust: Commission Obtains from Google
Comparable Display of Specialised Search Rivals – Frequently Asked
Questions’, MEMO/14/87, 5 February 2014.

European Commission press release. ‘Antitrust: Commission Probes
Allegations of Antitrust Violations by Google’,      **30 November 2010.

Federal Trade Commission, ‘Statement Regarding Google’s Search
Practices, In the matter of

Google Inc.’, FTC File Number 111-0163, 3 January 2013.

Fiveash, Kelly. ‘Google’s Euro Antitrust Offer: Fine! We’ll Link to Our
Search Rivals’, The Register, 25 April 2013,
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2013/04/25/ec\_gives\_google\_rivals\_one\_month\_to\_market\_test\_search\_tweaks/.

Franken, Al (Senator). ‘How Privacy Has Become an Antitrust Issue’,
American Bar Association Antitrust Section Spring Meeting, Washington
DC, 30 March 2012,
http://www.americanbar.org/calendar/2012/03/antitrust\_law\_2012springmeeting.html.

Franklyn, David J. and David A. Hyman. ‘Review of the Likely Effects of
Google’s Proposed Commitments Dated October 21, 2013’, 9 December 2013,
http://www.fairsearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/FairSearch-Hyman\_Franklyn-Study.pdf.

Fuchs, Christian. ‘Google Capitalism’, *tripleC*10 (.1) (2012): 42-48.

Fuster Morrell, Mayo. ‘The Unethics of Sharing: Wikiwashing’,
*International Review of Information Ethics* 15: 9-16.

Handley, Tyler. ‘P2P Search As An Alternative to Google: Recapturing
Network Value Through Decentralized Search’, *Journal of Peer
Production*3 ‘The Critical Power of Free Software’ (2013),
http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-3-free-software-epistemics/peer-reviewed-papers/p2p-search-as-an-alternative-to-google-recapturing-network-value-through-decentralized-search/.

Ibanez Colomo, Pablo. ‘Exclusionary Discrimination Under Article 102
TFEU’, *Common Market Law Review*, 51(.1) (2014): 141-163.

\_\_\_\_\_. ‘Exclusionary Effects in Google: Are They Relevant at All
for the Outcome of the Case?’, Chillin’ Competition, 30 December 2013,
http://chillingcompetition.com/2013/12/30/exclusionary-effects-in-google-are-they-relevant-at-all-for-the-outcome-of-the-case/.

ICOMP Response to Commission’s Announcement on the Google Antitrust
Case. 5 February 2014,
http://www.i-comp.org/blog/2014/icomp-response-commissions-announcement-google-antitrust-case/.

Pasquale, Frank A. ‘Beyond Innovation and Competition: The Need for
Qualified Transparency in Internet Intermediaries’, *Northwestern
University Law Review* 104.1 (2010): 105-173.

\_\_\_\_\_. ‘Dominant Search Engines: An Essential Cultural & Political
Facility’, in Berin Szoka and Adam Marcus (eds) *The Next Digital
Decade, Essays on the Future of the Internet*, Washington DC:
TechFreedom, 2010, pp 401-417.

\_\_\_\_\_. ‘Privacy, Antitrust and Power’, *George Mason Law Review*20
(.4) (2013): 1009-1024.

Rushe, Dominic. ‘Bing Censoring Chinese Language Search Results for
Users in the US’, *The Guardian*, 12 February 2014,
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/11/bing-censors-chinese-language-search-results.

Simpson, John M. ‘Consumer Groups on Both Sides of the Atlantic Oppose
Google Antitrust Settlement’, Consumer Watchdog, 26 November 2013,
http://www.consumerwatchdog.org/newsrelease/consumer-groups-both-sides-atlantic-oppose-google-antitrust-settlement.

Spink, Amanda, Bernard J. Jansen, Dietmar Wolfram, and Tefko Saracevic,
‘From E-Sex to E-Commerce: Web Search Changes’, *IEEE
Computer*, 35.3 (2002): 107-109.

StatCounter, ‘Global Stats Top 5 Search Engines in Europe from Feb 2013
to Jan 2014’,
http://gs.statcounter.com/\#search\_engine-eu-monthly-201302-201401.

StatCounter ‘Global Stats Top 5 Search Engines in the United States from
Feb 2013 to Jan 2014’,
http://gs.statcounter.com/\#search\_engine-US-monthly-201302-201401.

Steinhardt, Ezra. ‘Google Fined by the CNIL for Privacy Breaches as
European Regulators Continue Investigation’, Inside Privacy, 13 January
2014,
http://www.insideprivacy.com/google-fined-by-the-cnil-for-privacy-breaches-as-european-regulators-continue-investigation/.

Stucke, Maurice. ‘Reconsidering Antitrust’s Goals’ *Boston College Law
Review* 53 (2012): 551-629.

Townley, Christopher. *Article 81 EC and Public Policy,* Oxford: Hart
Publishing, 2009.

\_\_\_\_\_. ‘Which Goals Count in Article 101 TFEU?: public policy and
its discontents’, *European Competition Law Review* 9 (2011): 441-448.

Vaidhyanathan, Siva. *The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should
Worry),*Berkeley:**University of California Press, 2011.

Van Couvering, Elizabeth. ‘New Media? The Political Economy of Internet
Search Engines’, presented to the Communication Technology Policy
section of the International Association of Media & Communications
Researchers (IAMCR), Porto Alegre, 25-30 July 2004,
http://www.academia.edu/1047079/New\_media\_The\_political\_economy\_of\_Internet\_search\_engines.

Van Der Sar, Ernesto. ‘Google Starts Censoring BitTorrent, RapidShare
and More’, TorrentFreak, 26 January 2011,
http://torrentfreak.com/google-starts-censoring-bittorrent-rapidshare-and-more-110126/.

Volokh, Eugene and Falk, Donald, M. ‘First Amendment Protection for
Search Engine Search Results’, Google White Paper, 20 April 2012,
http://www.volokh.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/SearchEngineFirstAmendment.pdf.

###Notes

[^1]: ‘Antitrust’ is the U.S. term, whereas ‘competition’ is used in most
    other jurisdictions, including the United Kingdom and European
    Union, to refer to the same area of law. In this essay, I will use
    ‘competition’ except when referring specifically to the American
    system in which case ‘antitrust’ will be used.

[^2]: There are different methods of calculating shares of the search
    engine market in Europe, which are subject to various criticisms,
    but Google seems to come out in all of them as possessing a dominant
    position in this market.

[^3]: StatCounter, ‘Global Stats Top 5 Search Engines in Europe from Feb
    2013 to Jan 2014’,
    http://gs.statcounter.com/\#search\_engine-eu-monthly-201302-201401.

[^4]: StatCounter ‘Global Stats Top 5 Search Engines in the United States
    from Feb 2013 to Jan 2014’,
    http://gs.statcounter.com/\#search\_engine-US-monthly-201302-201401.

[^5]: Kristine L. Devine, ‘Preserving Competition in Multi-Sided
    Innovative Markets: How Do You Solve A Problem Like Google?’, *North
    Carolina Journal of Law and Technology* 10 (2009): 7.

[^6]: Elizabeth Van Couvering, ‘New Media? The Political Economy of
    Internet Search Engines’, paper presented to the Communication
    Technology Policy section of the International Association of Media
    & Communications Researchers (IAMCR), Porto Alegre, 25-30 July 2004,
    http://www.academia.edu/1047079/New\_media\_The\_political\_economy\_of\_Internet\_search\_engines.

[^7]: Although this is not without controversy. Changes to Google’s
    privacy policy in 2012 which allowed it to share users’ data across
    all of its products and services, was considered by national data
    protection authorities to breach data protection laws in the
    Netherlands, Spain and France. For more information, see Ezra
    Steinhardt, ‘Google Fined by the CNIL for Privacy Breaches as
    European Regulators Continue Investigation’, Inside Privacy, 13
    January 2014,
    http://www.insideprivacy.com/google-fined-by-the-cnil-for-privacy-breaches-as-european-regulators-continue-investigation/.

[^8]: European Commission press release, ‘Antitrust: Commission Probes
    Allegations of Antitrust Violations by Google’, 30 November
    2010.      

[^9]: This was also one of the complaints against Google forming the FTC
    investigation.

[^10]: Kelly Fiveash, ‘Google’s Euro Antitrust Offer: Fine! We’ll Link to
    Our Search Rivals’, The Register, 25 April 2013,
    http://www.theregister.co.uk/2013/04/25/ec\_gives\_google\_rivals\_one\_month\_to\_market\_test\_search\_tweaks/.

[^11]: See,
    http://www.consumerwatchdog.org/resources/googlesettlment102113.pdf.

[^12]: David J. Franklyn and David A. Hyman ‘Review of the Likely Effects
    of Google’s Proposed Commitments Dated October 21, 2013’, 9 December
    2013,
    http://www.fairsearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/FairSearch-Hyman\_Franklyn-Study.pdf.

[^13]: Franklyn and Hyman ‘Review of the Likely Effects’, p. 2.

[^14]: Franklyn and Hyman ‘Review of the Likely Effects’, p. 13.

[^15]: John M. Simpson, ‘Consumer Groups on Both Sides of the Atlantic
    Oppose Google Antitrust Settlement’, Consumer Watchdog, 26 November
    2013,
    http://www.consumerwatchdog.org/newsrelease/consumer-groups-both-sides-atlantic-oppose-google-antitrust-settlement.

[^16]: European Commission, ‘Antitrust: Commission Obtains from Google
    Comparable Display of Specialised Search Rivals – Frequently Asked
    Questions’, MEMO/14/87, 5 February 2014.

[^17]: Franklyn and Hyman, ‘Review of the Likely Effects’, pp. 10-11.

[^18]: ICOMP Response to Commission’s Announcement on the Google Antitrust
    Case, 5 February 2014,
    http://www.i-comp.org/blog/2014/icomp-response-commissions-announcement-google-antitrust-case/.

[^19]: Joaquin Almunia, ‘Statement on the Google investigation’ European
    Commission SPEECH/14/93, 5 February 2014.

[^20]: ‘Statement of the Federal Trade Commission Regarding Google’s Search
    Practices, In the Matter of Google Inc.’, FTC File Number 111-0163,
    3 January 2013.

[^21]: *Citizens United v Federal Election Commission* 558 US 310 (2010).

[^22]: Eugene Volokh and Donald M. Falk, ‘First Amendment Protection for
    Search Engine Search Results’, Google White Paper, 20 April 2012,
    http://www.volokh.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/SearchEngineFirstAmendment.pdf.

[^23]: Amanda Spink, Bernard J. Jansen, Dietmar Wolfram, and Tefko
    Saracevic, ‘From E-Sex To E-Commerce: Web Search Changes’, IEEE
    Computer, 35.3 (2002): 107.

[^24]: Indeed, there are allegations that Microsoft’s Bing, one of Google’s
    competitors has been actively engaged in censoring results for
    certain terms that are controversial in China such as the Dalai Lama
    for Chinese language users doing searches from the US:
    http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/11/bing-censors-chinese-language-search-results.

[^25]: Benjamin Edelman, ‘Hard-Coding Bias in Google Algorithmic Search
    Results’, 15 November 2010, http://www.benedelman.org/hardcoding/.

[^26]: Ernesto Van Der Sar, ‘Google Starts Censoring BitTorrent, RapidShare
    and More’, TorrentFreak, 26 January 2011,
    http://torrentfreak.com/google-starts-censoring-bittorrent-rapidshare-and-more-110126/.

[^27]: Al Franken, ‘How Privacy Has Become an Antitrust Issue’, American
    Bar Association Antitrust Section Spring Meeting, Washington DC, 30
    March 2012,
    http://www.americanbar.org/calendar/2012/03/antitrust\_law\_2012springmeeting.html.

[^28]: Pablo Ibanez Colomo, ‘Exclusionary Discrimination Under Article 102
    TFEU’, *Common Market Law Review*, 51 (2014) Issue 1: 141-163.

[^29]: Pablo Ibanez Colomo, ‘Exclusionary Effects in Google: Are They
    Relevant at All for the Outcome of the Case?’, Chillin’ Competition,
    30 December 2013,
    http://chillingcompetition.com/2013/12/30/exclusionary-effects-in-google-are-they-relevant-at-all-for-the-outcome-of-the-case/.

[^30]: Martin Cave and Howard Peter Williams, ‘Google and European
    Competition Law’, TPRC The 39th Research Conference on
    Communication, Information and Internet Policy, Arlington VA, 23-25
    September 2011,
    http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_id=1992974.

[^31]: Berkley Photo v Eastman Kodak, 444 US 1093 (1980).

[^32]: California Computer Products v International Business Machines, 613
    F.2d 727 (1979).

[^33]: Christopher Townley, ‘Which Goals Count in Article 101 TFEU?: Public
    Policy and its Discontents’, *European Competition Law Review* 9
    (2011).

[^34]: Maurice Stucke, ‘Reconsidering Antitrust’s Goals’, *Boston College
    Law Review* 53 (2012): 590.

[^35]: Christopher Townley, *Article 81 EC and Public Policy,* Oxford: Hart
    Publishing, 2009.

[^36]: Hubert Buch-Hansen and Angela Wigger, *The Politics of European
    Competition Regulation: A Critical Political Economy Perspective*,
    Abingdon and New York: Routledge, 2011.

[^37]: Robert W. Crandall and Clifford Winston, ‘Does Antitrust Policy
    Improve Consumer Welfare? Assessing the Evidence’, *Journal of
    Economic Perspectives* 17.4 (2003): 3.

[^38]: Franken, ‘How Privacy Has Become an Antitrust Issue’.

[^39]: Cave and Williams, ‘Google and European Competition Law’.

[^40]: EDRi, ‘US Privacy Groups Believe US Officials Lobby to Weaken EU
    Privacy’, 13 February 2013,
    http://www.edri.org/edrigram/number11.3/us-privacy-groups-eu-law-lobby.

[^41]: Frank A. Pasquale, ‘Privacy, Antitrust and Power’, *George Mason Law
    Review*20.4 (2013).

[^42]: Council of Europe, ‘Recommendation CM/Rec (2012) 3 of the Committee
    of Ministers to member States on the protection of human rights with
    regard to search engines’, 4 April 2012,
    https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1929429&Site=CM.

[^43]: Frank A. Pasquale, ‘Dominant Search Engines: An Essential Cultural &
    Political Facility’, in Berin Szoka and Adam Marcus (eds) The Next
    Digital Decade, Essays on the Future of the Internet, Washington DC:
    TechFreedom, 2010, pp. 401-417.

[^44]: Frank A. Pasquale, ‘Beyond Innovation and Competition: The Need for
    Qualified Transparency in Internet Intermediaries’, Northwestern
    University Law Review 104.1 (2010).

[^45]: Christian Fuchs, ‘Google Capitalism’, *tripleC* 10.1 (2012):
    47-48.

[^46]: Siva Vaidhyanathan, *The Googlization of Everything (And Why We
    Should Worry)*, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011.

[^47]: Mayo Fuster Morrell, ‘The Unethics of Sharing: Wikiwashing’,
    *International Review of Information Ethics* 15: 10.

[^48]: Tyler Handley, ‘P2P Search As An Alternative to Google: Recapturing
    Network Value Through Decentralized Search’, *Journal of Peer
    Production:* *The Critical Power of Free Software*3,
    http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-3-free-software-epistemics/peer-reviewed-papers/p2p-search-as-an-alternative-to-google-recapturing-network-value-through-decentralized-search/.



