Polluted and Predictive, in 133 Words

Mél Hogan and M.E. Luka

>*Never forget that Google collects data for a commercial purpose. It is
not a public archive. Besides this, the Google search engine is getting
more and more ‘polluted’, coming up with useless and predictable search
outcomes.* - Geert Lovink [^1]

For the *Society of the Query Reader*, we present here segments of a
conversation done via email, inspired by interventions into Google
‘suggestions’, collected and compared over time. The discussion is
between communications and media consultant and doctoral scholar M.E.
Luka (Montréal and Halifax, Canada), and digital curation postdoc and
media scholar-practitioner, Mél Hogan (Colorado University, Boulder,
U.S.), collaborators on various projects including recent Korsakow
[^2] workshops and developing theories of archival
production. [^3] For both, professional and scholarly
interests are deeply intertwined and more generally concerned with
creativity, the arts, and digital media and the archive. Showcasing a
collection of 133 words selected by Mél Hogan, and captured through a
series of screen grabs in April 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013, M.E. Luka
leads a dialogue that revolves around the parameters of this ‘polluted’
and predictive archive, the process and display of the political poetry
it generates, and the choice of (the 133) words that constitute the
basis of this search.

Conceived for the web, an earlier iteration of this interview can also
be found in a ‘clickable’ version online at melhogan.com and
http://moreartculturemediaplease.com/interview-mel-hogan-and-google-query.

2013

**woman is:**

the future of man

that meant to insult me

a woman

the earth

the reflection of her man

a danger cat

too pretty to work

the weaker vessel

a devil

beheaded

**M.E. Luka: What is Google Suggest?**

Mél Hogan: Though refined over the years, Google Suggest has been an
experimental feature since 2004. Currently, not every user is privy to
the same suggestions by Google; it’s therefore needed to address the
intentions of the algorithm and its discrimination based on location,
language, as well as a series of other factors. According to Google’s
blog, terms pertaining to nationality (but not religion) are removed
from suggestions, as are hate- or violence-related queries, personally
identifiable information, porn and adult content, legally mandated
removals, and piracy-related items. But reading through this archive,
it’s incredibly violent, so it would be great to see how Google defines
violence and how it polices it.

Everyday words become defined through user queries, feeding into a
weird, increasingly funneled and frenzied, though not entirely random,
pool of associations between stereotypes, lyrics, memes, as well as
sincere searches.

As you type in Google’s search bar, its algorithm predicts and displays
search queries based on users’ search activities, including the contents
of web pages indexed by Google (known as Google Suggest or
Autocomplete). While this drop-down list of calculated suggestions
completing user queries has spawned several memes, inspired game-like
interaction, and invited scrutiny over the so-called collective archive
it generates, I want our conversation to go in an exploratory direction
and expose some of Google’s suggestions over the course of the last four
years.

**ML: OK, then let’s start with the words. You really picked 133 words?
Why 133? What are they? Are they thematic?**

MH: By way of free association and without counting how many words were
going to be part of this archive, the 133 words I selected to track in
Google Search over the course of the past four years are: academia,
activism, arab, arabic, body, boy, boyfriend, bush, canada, capitalism,
care, catholic, chance, change, christianity, communication, control,
courage, cowboy, culture, daughter, death, destiny, dude, enemy, evil,
faith, fascism, father, fear, female, femininity, feminism, fool, free
speech, friendship, gay, gender, girl, girlfriend, god, goddess,
goodness, gospel, government, grace, greed, gun, happiness, hate speech,
heterosexuality, homophobia, homosexuality, hope, identity, insanity,
instinct, integrity, is, islam, jew, jewish, joy, justice, labour, law,
laziness, life, love, luck, lust, male, man, masculinity, mind, money,
morality, mother, muslim, need, obsession, passion, peace, perception,
perfection, phd, poverty, power, pride, procrastination, property,
prostitution, quebec, race, racism, rage, reality, reason, religion,
respect, right, sadness, sanity, satan, sex work, sex, sexiness, sexism,
sexuality, shyness, sin, slavery, socialism, son, soul, spirit, terror,
terrorism, thought, tom cruise, transgender, trouble, trust, want, war,
woman, work, and xy.

The entire archive is available at http://melhogan.com.

For the first year, the process included selecting the words. Inspired
by my trajectory in cultural studies/media studies, and my growing
interests in the link between human emotion and algorithms, these words
were the words I chose for this collection. At the time I had a few of
these collections going, but this particular thread is the one I kept
collecting over the past four years.

**ML: Why these words, in particular?**

MH: I think the words and the searches they suggest point to things
people are searching out in private. Real questions. Real worries. It
might show how fucked up we all are. What do you think? Look below at
‘daughter is’ – while the suggestions change a little over time, the
sentiment remains the same. I find that it’s the words that denote a
relationship – daughter or boyfriend, for example – are the most
deranged. People searching out answers about (and maybe on behalf of)
others? Can Google suggestions become a way to suss out what others are
experiencing? Is it where we go to feel normal, even if that normal is
twisted?

**ML: Hmm. I don’t know. There’s something about the creepily fast
predictive suggestions that kind of freaks me out. But maybe, yes, it
could be a way to combine with others, emotionally, about shared topics.
To have a conversation without having to engage in actual, live
dialogue. I found the lists really compelling. And I found myself
comparing the lists from one year to the next, because you gave them to
me in a way that was easy to compare.**

2010

2011

2012

2013

daughter is:

overweight

depressed

moving away

pregnant

a bully

mean

tired all the time

calling ringtones

losing hair

a prostitute

daughter is:

mean

pregnant

always cold

constipated

a bully

a loner

cutting herself

tired all the time

overweight

calling ringtone

daughter is:

pregnant

depressed

cutting herself

spanish

pregnant with dads child

constipated

mean

out of control

disrespectful to mother

a brat

daughter is:

pregnant

calling ringtone

spanish

an atheist

sexting

getting married

depressed

a brat

taller than me

a tomboy

boyfriend is:

depressed

distant

ignoring me

selfish

insecure

a virgin

moving away

a jerk

too big

boyfriend is:

distant

depressed

selfish

sick

ignoring me

cheap

too big

gay

boring

mad at me

boyfriend is:

distant

selfish

a virgin

boring

depressed

a jerk

sick

controlling

too clingy

insecure

boyfriend is:

depressed

immature

a virgin

a douchebag

boring

ignoring me

moving away

selfish

distant

gay

**What’s more, when I see each of the columns of phrases typed up formally
in a table (rather than just as screen grabs), they seem to gain
authority, and I find myself fighting emotionally with the meanings
thrown at me by the lists. Does every word cause this to happen?**

MH: Not every word produces a result, so in that way this social
experiment is biased to words that generate results, popular enough
searches. What I've noticed is that these are the kinds of words that
tend to provoke and trigger strange – and very sad – results from the
pooled mindset that has become Google Search. I think, in part, that’s
because there are genuine queries mixed in with vile equations that
together form a sad but somewhat accurate definition of these words, as
conceived of generally. Most of it is disgustingly violent. Some of it
is more ambivalent. Some of it is just funny. I guess that’s a mirror of
us…?

2013

muslim is:

not a race

evil

gonna get you

religion of peace

wrong

fake

cult

the new black

the right religion

not a religion of peace

mother is:

the name for god

spanish

crazy

dying

an alcoholic

narcissistic

a freshman

a sociopath

depressed

emotionally abusive

male is:

x or y

xy

spanish

pregnant

the capital of what country

a boy or a girl

better than female

in which country

the capital of

my capital city

poverty is:

state of mind

the worst form of violence

the parent of revolution and crime

relative

a disease

a choice

real

found to be correlated with

worse than crack

quebec is:

racist

a nation

a joke

stupid

poor

a good place to live

racism is:

good

stupid

the pits

the wrong way hoodie

taught

funny

over

schism on a serious tip

prejudice plus power

dead

transgender is:

wrong

bullshit

a mental disorder

a sin

not real

stupid

sexist

a choice

real

a disorder

sex work is:

work

part of the community

immoral

is real work tumblr

not sex trafficking

It’s true though that if the results didn’t show something this sad and
vulgar, the project would probably be far less interesting; it wouldn’t
have drawn me in or consumed all of my time collecting and comparing and
deciphering WTF is going on with us all. There are a few other projects
that document the sad state of Google Search results , like 'Pure
Sadness: The Top 10 Google Searches Of 2012' [^4] and
'Google Proves Humanity Is Sick and Sad, Yet Absolutely Hilarious'.
[^5] Sad and hilarious, I think that’s mostly where we
are at. So, I'm certainly not the only one to collect like this. Many of
my projects resemble others', but I think we all come to these urges to
collect and document for different reasons. People came to the hilarity
(or sadness) of this function and started to document it in different
ways. For (a recent) example, I just came across this Twitter hashtag
for \#sadgooglesearches. [^6]

**ML: Hilarious. There’s so much action on this front that there’s a
Twitter hashtag about it. When I was looking through the
\#sadgooglesearches posts, I noticed there were hundreds of them on 14
August 2013. And then I found a commentary on the twitter hashtag
stream. [^7] So now there’s of-the-moment commentary on
the topic, not just annual round-ups at year-end. This is what we have
spent years and billions on perfecting, in order to have the speediest
\#sadgooglesearches? How is this helping humankind? What kind of social
values are we involved in generating? Also, on a more mundane level, I’m
curious to know – are Sad Google Searches the equivalent of cat videos
on YouTube?**

MH: I think we're back to ‘sad’ as the agreed upon state of the search
archive…

**ML: It feels like a terribly sad loss of potential to me. Is there a way
to look at this that could be a little more optimistic? What about the
predictive elements of this particular conundrum? Do you see Google as
an oracle? [^8]**

MH: Ha! No. It’s the opposite. Actually, I don’t know, maybe it is.
We’re going to look back on all this one day and see how messed up we
are, at this particular juncture, where what’s possible technologically
is far ahead of any culturally agreed upon norms. If we’re following
technology, and that’s what’s documented here, then it’s an oracle that
is reductively predictive and polluted. We may look back on this in a
decade or two and be embarrassed by our paltry beginning efforts. But
chances are most traces of these searches will be long gone… which is why
art projects like this become important, right?

**ML: Yes! So if you do enough iterations, the danger might be that the
searches only take us down increasingly narrow or reprehensible paths.
But the upside (to use a horrible corporate term) is that there will
actually be traces of these searches.**

MH: I’m not sure how to describe what it produces exactly, but in terms
of content alone, it often points to books, movies, and music, popular
lyrics and quotes. For example: love, death, grace, respect, and
courage, when looked at more closely:

[IMG1: LOVE IS 2013]

2013

love is:

patient

patient love is kind

all you need

a battlefield

blindness

a battlefield lyrics

war lyrics

blindness lyrics

my religion

verb lyrics

‘Love is patient’ is a biblical verse. [^9] ‘Love is all
you need’ is a 2012 romantic movie [^10] as well as a
famous lyric from a Beatles song. ‘Love is a battlefield’ is a Pat
Benatar hit from the 80s. [^11] ‘Love is blindness' is
a U2 song, [^12] but brought to life again by Jack
White in 2013 because of the 2013 Great Gatsby film (also a remake)
soundtrack. [^13] So all of this is very much a
commentary on popular culture.

**ML: Popular culture, or the vernacular – this is the very foundation of
the nation-state, according to Benedict Anderson.
[^14] How we construct our social selves and
articulate shared values: these are critical markers. We imagine
ourselves into existence. Music, poetry, journalism. Metaphor,
imagination, love, loss. I don’t like to think that Google
Search/Suggest might one day lead us to the Republic of Google Nation.
But, oh right, it already has. In fact, more than one Google Nation.
[^15]**

[IMG2: DEATH IS 2013] [either picture 1 or 2, whichever fits best]

2013

death is:

nothing at all

not the end

the road to awe

certain life is not

bad blog

but crossing the world

not the greatest loss in life

not dying

just around the corner lyrics

a star book

MH: ‘Death is nothing at all’ is a poem by Henry Scott Holland: ‘ Death
is nothing at all. I have only slipped away to the next room. I am I and
you are you. Whatever we were to each other, That, we still are […] ’
[^16] ‘Death is not the end’ is a Bob Dylan tune.
‘Death is the road to awe’ links to a Soundcloud account,
[^17] and ‘Death is certain life is not’ leads to a
Yahoo! Forum where the phrase needs to be explained.
[^18] ‘Death is not the greatest loss in life’ is a
quote attributable to Norman Cousins: ‘Death is not the greatest loss in
life. The greatest loss is what dies inside us while we live.’
[^19] It’s also a quote by Tupac Shakur: ‘Death is not
the greatest loss in life. The greatest loss is what dies inside while
still alive. Never surrender.’ [^20]

**ML: Or, as long as we have a place to go to assert that we are alive, we
can survive death. As Banana Yoshimoto suggests: ‘When I’m dead worn
out, in a reverie, I often think that when it comes time to die, I want
to breathe my last in a kitchen. Whether it’s cold and I’m all alone, or
somebody’s there and it’s warm, I’ll stare death fearlessly in the eye.’
[^21]**

2013

grace is:

gone lyrics

gone

gone dave matthews

sufficient

gone chords

gone tab

gone movie

enough

enough chords

overrated

MH: ‘Grace is gone’ is a poorly rated 2007 movie,
[^22] and also a song by the Dave Matthews Band.
[^23] ‘Grace is overrated’ is not just a statement
about grace but rather a blog about hand-drawn guided journals:
http://www.graceisoverrated.com/. [^24]

2013

respect is:

earned

earned not given

earned not given quote

earned quotes

a must tour

burning

just the minimum

love

not earned

everything

‘Respect is earned’ is a typical saying. ‘Respect is a must tour’ is a
search for a hip hop band tour. [^25] I started to
sing along to Lauryn Hill's ‘Respect is just the minimum’.
[^26] ‘Respect is burning’ is also a music compilation
CD. [^27] So a lot of it is about music, but arguably
a lot of music is about life, so it’s very fitting for the effect
produced by this kind of archive.

2013

courage is:

not the absence of fear

lyrics

change

grace under pressure

not the absence of fear quote

my strength

contagious

not always a roar

the strange familiar

absence of fear

‘Courage is not the absence of fear’ and ‘Courage is the absence of
fear’ likely points to an Ambrose Redmoon quote: ‘Courage is not the
absence of fear, but rather the judgment that something else is more
important than fear.’ [^28] ‘Courage is grace under
pressure’ is an Ernest Hemingway quote. [^29] ‘Courage
is contagious’ is also a quote [^30] but reveals many
other things too as top hits: WikiLeaks paraphernalia, a TED talk on
courage, and a URL for a website documenting ‘the amazing events of
2010, and the unraveling of the worlds governments thanks to the courage
of many people and one man in particular’.

2012

2013

culture is:

not your friend

not optional

your operating system

ordinary

learned

ordinary raymond williams

dynamic

destiny

symbolic

culture is:

learned

not your friend

defined as

shared

ordinary

not optional

integrated

not supported

symbolic

like an iceberg

Then there are sequences that are harder to qualify: ‘culture is like an
iceberg’, which becomes really interesting when you follow the Google
suggestion all the way through to the query… what happened in 2013 to
make culture be like an iceberg?

**ML: The power of metaphor and simile at our fingertips through Google
Search/Suggest. ‘Culture is an iceberg’ is a quote from a 1976 book no
longer in print, *Orientations to Intercultural Communication*, by Sharon
Ruhly. [^31] It has persisted so strongly that a
recent blog post by another intercultural communications scholar, Milton
Bennett, goes to great lengths to insist that such communication is a
process, not an object understandable through this metaphor.
[^32] Or maybe there is some kind of poetic essence
that is shaken into existence by the ritualistic repetition of ‘xxx is
...’. Or even better, through the plaintive addition of ‘why?’, as in
‘Why is the measure of love loss?’ [^33] So ... why do
you collect?**

MH: In the case of this Google Suggestion project, collecting
screengrabs was the only way to record a search and to document it over
time. These queries shift all the time – it’s probably technologically
impossible to do the same search twice. I think in this case, collecting
is a way to hold onto evidence of a phenomenon and also to share
iterations easily online. It’s also fun.

Personally, this process began during the time I was writing my
dissertation in 2012, and it became a means by which to
procrastinate/meditate, almost at the same time. [^34]
I've been collecting stuff online – users’ comments are still my
favorite; [^35] I've collected desktop screengrabs.
[^36] This collection of people’s desktop was selected
to be in the next exhibition for the Screen Saver Gallery project, a
contemporary digital art gallery of screensavers run by Czech artists
Barbora Trnková and Tomáš Javůrek. [^37] And of course, the Google Suggestion searches we’re talking about now.
[^38]

During grad school, I also took a photo of myself every day, for more
than seven years, to see time pass. To see myself fall apart because of
stress. So I think this urge to collect is a form of meditative hoarding, which
speaks to my academic work on digital archives [^39]
and my production work on collections management as well.
[^40] It all really comes together when you account
for change – to see yourself as positioned differently in relation to
objects in time, and a photo of yourself can be an object.

The week of 9-17 September 2013, I collected tweets from the Boulder
Floods (\#boulderflood) because, re-assembled, they tell a story.
[^41] The happy sporty Boulder avatars, the politics
of blame, the importance of animal rescue, the comparisons to New
Orleans’ Katrina – these all become fodder for a more scholarly
intervention, but this select archive of tweets also tells a story about
the event, and as well, inadvertently, about me and what I value as a
collector.

Conceptually, I collect because word objects start to make more sense in
relation to one another; they give each other context(s).

**ML: Do you mean – dialogic? Conversational? Perhaps this is generated
simply through juxtaposition? Or maybe the self-focused (sometimes
self-centered, or self-ish) nature of the comments don’t allow for
dialogue at all. No responsibility to others, just a delight in hearing
one’s own voice in the ether.**

MH: The Comments Collection project I did in 2010 was about collecting
comments on YouTube videos, ones about the anticipated 2012 end of the
world phenomena. [^42] I like to select and carefully
reorganize these bits of texts, usually in PowerPoint, so that it tells
its own story, without additional contextual information. As in, you can
just read it and get it.

**ML: I remember when you did this project. Definitely, I found the level
of violence in the commentary disturbing. No real space for compassion.
But I also like to think about the *People this 2012 shit is hype* piece
in tandem with your 52-pickup project on the end of the world.
[^43] Which I think is brilliant, optimistic, funny,
and *conversational*. I believe that’s because you are at the heart of it,
prompting discussion and thoughtful (and/or hilarious) responses to the
question you posed about the end of the world. [^44]**

MH: With the Comments Collection, assembling the story from other
peoples’ comments worked really well. I did about 20,
[^45] dealing with things from music sampling to
WikiLeaks as perceived in different newspapers across the world. I like
to collect other people's words because the text itself is all that
matters – tone, spelling, word choice. Like many people, I often skip
the article and go directly to the comments to get a quicker sense of
the important issues within the piece.

With this Google Search project, it was a similar incentive. But I
wanted to mark the Search over time – which is always as much a
commentary on the mode of documentation (whether the screen grab or
PowerPoint, copy and paste) as it is about the contents. For me, the
simplicity of the tools for collection and display are really important.
I rarely think of what to make of the collection. I just like to collect
and make ‘lists’ and organize the content into a story. Collecting is the best way for me to document web phenomena and
simultaneously comment on web cultures. There's something in the gesture
of collecting that’s in itself a means to expose meaning.

**ML: How is collecting different from the massive growth in self-tracking
through digital technology (e.g. on Facebook, through fitness apps
etc.)? For example, technology journalist Nora Young explores
self-tracking in her new book, *The Virtual Self: How Our Digital Lives
Are Altering the World Around Us*, [^46] though she
doesn’t see it as a narcissistic practice – more as a meditation. The
repetitive nature of the collection is what is important, i.e. a kind of
processing or transforming ourselves while doing.**

MH: I haven’t read Young’s work but I do believe there’s a correlation.
I think that the NSA debacles since the summer have more than proven
that everything is tracked and stored, even if there’s always the
problem of information overload, including making sense of huge pools of
data. The ways in which it is different from biofeedback apps is that
it’s much more collective and in some ways, more anonymous on the
surface. Fitness apps really focus on your body, improvements, and
motivation. Facebook is also profile focused and serves to link data to
specific individuals within a network. Google Search and Suggestion
mashes us all together!

**ML: Web-based practices are often referred to as ‘virtual’ practices.
This term – ‘virtual’ – is tantalizingly close to the terms ‘virtuous’
(be-good), and ‘virtuosity’ (display excellence and expertise). Are your
interventions virtuous rummagings into the dominance of Google-as-web?
Why are you seeking virtuosity in your practice – if you are? And/or why
are you probing to see whether and how Google’s Cache and Search
functions are performing a kind of virtuosity in predictive
‘pollutability’ themselves?**

MH: For my collection, I became interested in the process of documenting
searches via screen grabs over a period of a few years. The results will
become increasingly telling over time – especially in terms of
documenting popular culture in unexpected ways:

2013

friendship is:

witchcraft

magic

dragons

magic wiki

witchcraft the movie

magic season 4

witchcraft episode 1

magic part 1

magic episodes

witchcraft tvtropes

I am wondering how these searches might change based on the ongoing
queries made to Google – 5,134,000,000 searches per day in 2012.
[^47]

But I think this is what Geert Lovink’s quote at the beginning of this
conversation gets at: Google is not a public archive. But in a sense, if
thought of as an archive – the possibilities for creative intervention
are endless.

**ML: OK, I’m all for this – generating endless creative possibilities.
But let’s think it through on a theoretical level as well as through the
research-creation you’ve undertaken. Does the theory match what you are
finding in your collections?**

MH: Google is now highly synonymous with the web, as the main search
tool and for browsing the web (rivaled in its ubiquity only by the likes
of social networking tools like Facebook and Twitter, which serve
decidedly different primary functions than to provide rapid web-based
searches). While highly technical, Google’s search function can be
analyzed from a user/researcher perspective, contributing to an
important dialogue about access, and more specifically about access to
the web’s ‘past’. Google has been making its index available through
cached copies – Google Cache – since 1998.

To make its collection accessible, Google uses parallel processing ‘on a
distributed network of thousands of low-cost computers’, which means it
can crawl and harvest the web rapidly and in many ‘places’
simultaneously. [^48] More simply, Google’s Googlebot
‘crawls’ around the web. From these crawls, the indexer sorts every word
into a database, against which users’ queries are compared and for which
search results are generated. Based on Google’s own Technological
Overview, the vision and mission for the ‘perfect search’ is something
that ‘understands exactly what you mean and gives you back exactly what
you want’, according to Google co-founder Larry Page.
[^49]

However, this notion of the search is complicated by Siva Vaidhyanathan,
who argues in his book, *The Googlization of Everything* that ‘search’ in
Google is as much about what is concealed as what is revealed.
[^50] Google’s process is based on four elements:
relevance, comprehensiveness, freshness, and speed. Combined, these are
meant to allow searches to be at once comprehensive and subjective.
These algorithms are updated weekly or even daily and are increasingly
customized for each user, based on search history and location. Because
algorithms are constantly changing, a search can hardly reproduce the
same results (though this is difficult to verify and track because it
rarely gets recorded). This, according to Vaidhyanathan, demonstrates
that searches are not mathematical calculations based solely on
correlations that objectively benefit users; they are largely the
product of careful decisions by programmers working with and within
large corporations. Vaidhyanathan also points out that the search
privileges the recent over the classic, the local over the global, and
the personal over the universal; all criteria that are largely about
making consumption (online shopping) more effective, not research that
relies on consistency in primary and secondary sources.
[^51]

**ML: Aha. So Google searches are simultaneously about: shopping, random
but funneled research, seeking specific kinds of solutions, and…
something else entirely.**

MH: Google aims to index all media and formats, and to do so
continually, eventually moving into what they call ‘Realtime Search’.
While the function itself ‘went missing’ in July 2011 when Google put
forth its Google +1 platform, the concept itself remains intact.
[^52] Google’s Realtime Search (likely to re-emerge
eventually) suggests that there is no difference between information
created and information published – much like the Twitter application –
where access is also said to be instantaneous. [^53]

Interestingly, speed is the emphasis for – and increasing speed, the
priority of – Google, whose query response time is ‘roughly one-fourth
of a second’. [^54] By relying on Realtime Search,
Google’s archive shifts into the mode of a live or living archive, where
events are not only documented moments after they occur in ‘real time’,
but are also indexed and made available within seconds. The ‘distance’
between the past and the present is shortened, putting into question the
proximity of primary and secondary sources within an online archival
strategy. Furthermore, given Google’s super servers, a site can often be
accessed more rapidly through the cached version than the ‘live’ page
itself – and this is important as it effectively thwarts the notion of
an original source and any idea of a singular ‘present’ moment or site
as point of reference. As Google indexes content on the web to provide its search tool, it
simultaneously makes copies of every document in the index (the Google
index is roughly 100 million gigabytes). [^55]

**ML: That is mind-blowing. But, not entirely ‘real’, right? You talk
about the significant role played by caches and caching as a key element
of data management.**

MH: In their on-site documentation, Google glosses over the fact that
their index and archive is limited to files at 101 kilobytes of text;
that is, the ‘cached version of the page will consist of the first 101
kbytes’, 120 kbytes for PDFs. [^56] How and if this
replicates the true size and complete document is not factored into the
summary, an important lack in the overall framework that constitutes
Google Cache’s collection of the past.

In Google’s cache, a cached copy is a version of a web page as it
appeared when it was indexed, which is not necessarily a reflection of
the present or most current page. Website owners can opt out of the
index, but their site is still likely to be cached despite the ‘cache’
button and access to the cached version being omitted from the interface
(made invisible). As John Battelle dramatizes in *The Search*, Google
creates ‘a world in which every click can be preserved forever’.
[^57] The default of multiplying remains even if the
cached version is hidden or made inaccessible to the general public;
files exist across servers, continually indexing the web’s data.
However, since the cache exists as an opt-out process (rather than as an
informed opt-in), most users overlook the issue of copies as they
pertain to these mass automated indexing projects. Part of what makes
Google Cache so valuable is its span, despite being largely understated
in its current (re)presentation. Google restricts access to the index,
making only the most recent indexed version available. Access is limited
to one single revision. Needless to say, Google’s collection of the
web’s past grows continuously, exponentially in size and, in turn, in
value. However, because it is a corporation working in a competitive
environment, Google’s indexing and its reliance on metadata standards
are kept as trade secrets, which is a stark contrast to archives and
library environments where this information is shared freely – and
becomes more valuable for it. [^58] This brings
attention to the ways the online realm is not accessible or ‘open’
simply by virtue of being online.

**ML: I think this is an important observation, and brings us back to a
consideration of these patterns and limits as invariably sad (but not
tragic) and ultimately violent (though sometimes life-affirming) in a
disconcertingly Foucauldian way [^59] (the Panopticon?
Who’s in charge here? Who’s surveilling whom?) – but on a societal
scale, and not always discouragingly.**

MH: Unlike formal archives, Google Cache rejects the notion and impetus
for creating a permanent historical record of the web. Instead, when
pages disappear, Google claims to delete ‘dead’ links as quickly as
possible. [^60] For now, however, Google Cache remains
more theoretical than practical, as, by Google’s own admission, there
are only occasional clicks on the ‘cache’ button – and this for a search
engine that gets in the order of a few billion hits each day.
[^61]

**ML: So – we are in the process of exponentially generating and
simultaneously eliminating our histories, though the evidence in the
archives suggests that we ought to remain hopeful: there are traces
after all, and we persist in trying to find and understand them. Right?
This could mean that the action of collecting comments and searches – as
you and others have done – kicks back against the totalizing or
discouraging urge, or trajectory, and opens the door to hilarious,
engaged, enjoyable. To say it more plainly, preferably without slipping
into the trite, thinking and feeling histories and experiences of love
and life – through popular culture, the formation of culture, the
sharing of culture – are transformative. Even (perhaps especially)
through the widely shared Google Suggest experience. How reaffirming to
see so many hundreds of thousands of others who have asked your question
before you. And yet, your own questions – and answers/responses – may be
entirely different.**

*Big thank you to Andrea Zeffiro with help formatting footnotes and works
cited for this piece.*

###References

Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities, London and New York: Verso,
2006 (1983).

Battelle, John. *The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed Our Culture*, London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 2005.

Beall, Jeffrey. 'How Google Uses Metadata to Improve Search Results',
*The Serials Librarian* 59.1 (2010): 40-530.

Bennett, Milton. 'Culture is Not Like an Iceberg', IDR Institute blog, 6
May 2013, http://www.idrinstitute.org/page.asp?menu1=14.

'Billy Graham', BrainyQuote.com, Xplore Inc, 24 December 2013,
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/b/billygraha113622.html .

Blachman, Nancy and Jerry Peek, 'Cached Pages', Google Guide,
http://www.googleguide.com/cached\_pages.html.

'Death is Nothing at all', Poemhunter.com, 28 November 2004,
http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/death-is-nothing-at-all.

Diaz, Jesus. 'Google Proves Humanity Is Sick and Sad Yet Absolutely
Hilarious', Gizmodo.com, 2 December 2009,
http://gizmodo.com/5152141/google-proves-humanity-is-sick-and-sad-yet-absolutely-hilarious.

'Ernest Hemingway', BrainyQuote.com, Xplore Inc, 24 December 2013,
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/e/ernesthemi131094.html .

Fairchild, Mary. ‘”Love Is Patient, Love Is Kind” Bible Verse',
About.com Christianity,
http://christianity.about.com/od/prayersverses/qt/Love-Is-Patient-Love-Is-Kind.htm.

Fox, Vanessa. 'Google Realtime Search Goes Missing', Search Engine Land,
3 July 2011,
http://searchengineland.com/google-realtime-search-goes-missing-84130.

Google, ‘Our Products and Services’,
http://www.google.com/corporate/tech.html.

‘Google Annual Search Statistics’, 16 June 2013,
http://www.statisticbrain.com/google-searches/.

Hogan, Mél. Crashing the Archive: A Research-Creation Intervention into
the SAW Video Mediatheque, PhD thesis, Concordia University, 2012,
http://spectrum.library.concordia.ca/973890.

\_\_\_\_\_. 'Google’s Suggestive Archive', 25 June 2012,
http://melhogan.com/website/google-suggestions-archive-of-human-sense.

\_\_\_\_\_. 'Show Me Your Desktop', 5 June 2012,
http://melhogan.com/website/show-me-your-desktop.

\_\_\_\_\_. 'People This 2012 Shit is Hype!' YouTube.com, 2 Sept 2010,
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6O6UqLnZqI.

\_\_\_\_\_. '\#boulderflood', 15 Sept 2013,
http://melhogan.com/website/sept-boulderflood/.

\_\_\_\_\_. 'Comment Collection: “What is this ‘PAY’ word you speak
of?”' 23 June 2010,
http://melhogan.com/website/comment-collection-what-is-this-pay-word-you-speak-of/.

\_\_\_\_\_. 'Comment Collection: “Les sources de quoi, chéri?”' 23 Feb
2011,
http://melhogan.com/website/comment-collection-les-sources-de-quoi-cheri/.

Hogan, Mél and Mary Elizabeth Luka. 'Archiving ArtSpots with Mary
Elizabeth Luka', No More Potlucks, Vol. 25 (January/February 2013).

Huffer, Lynne and Elizabeth Wilson. 'Mad for Foucault: A Conversation',
Theory, Culture & Society 27 (2010): 324-338.

Lovink, Geert. 'Back from Gent: Notes On Memories of the Future', Net Critique blog, 26 June 2010,
http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/2010/06/26/back-from-gent-notes-on-memories-of-the-future.

Olsen, Stefanie. 'Google Cache Raises Copyright Concerns’, CNET News, 9
July 2003, http://news.cnet.com/2100-1038\_3-1024234.html.

Paine, Jake. 'Webbie “Savage Life 4Ever” Release Date, Trill Fam
“Respect Is A Must Tour” Dates', Hip Hop DX, 27 June 2013,
http://www.hiphopdx.com/index/news/id.24471/title.webbie-savage-life-4ever-release-date-trill-fam-respect-is-a-must-tour-dates.

'Pure Sadness: The Top 10 Google Searches', Geekologie.com, 12 December
2012,
http://geekologie.com/2012/12/pure-sadness-the-top-10-google-searches.php.

Rhiannon, Alexis. 'Other Sad Google Searches: Twitter Hashtag Trending',
Crushable.com, 14 August 2013,
http://www.crushable.com/2013/08/14/other-stuff/sad-google-searches-twitter-hashtag-trending.

Ruhly, Sharon. Orientations to Intercultural Communication, Chicago:
Science Research Associates, 1976.

Sullivan, Danny. 'What Is Real Time Search? Definitions & Players',
Search Engine Land, 9 July 2009,
http://searchengineland.com/what-is-real-time-search-definitions-players-22172.

Vaidhyanathan, Siva. The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should
Worry), Berkley: University of California Press, 2011.

Winterson, Jeannette. Written on the Body, Toronto: Random House of
Canada, 1992

Yoshimoto, Banana. Kitchen, trans. Megan Backus, New York: Washington
Square Press/Simon & Schuster Inc., 1993 (1988).

Young, Nora. The Virtual Self: How Our Digital Lives Are Altering the
World Around Us, Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 2012.

###Notes

[^1]: Geert Lovink, 'Back from Gent: Notes on Memories of the Future', 26
    June 2010, Net Critique blog,
    http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/2010/06/26/back-from-gent-notes-on-memories-of-the-future/.

[^2]: For example, Korsakow workshops held at the Brakhage Center at the
    University of Colorado in Boulder, 2013. See,
    http://brakhagecenter.com/?tag=korsakow .

[^3]: Mél Hogan and Mary Elizabeth Luka, 'Archiving Art Spots with Mary
    Elizabeth Luka', No More Potlucks, vol. 25, (January/February 2013),
    http://nomorepotlucks.org/site/archiving-artspots-with-mary-elizabeth-luka-mel-hogan.

[^4]: 'Pure Sadness: The Top 10 Google Searches', Geekologie.com, 12
    December 2012,
    http://geekologie.com/2012/12/pure-sadness-the-top-10-google-searches.php.

[^5]: Jesus Diaz, 'Google Proves Humanity Is Sick and Sad Yet Absolutely
    Hilarious', Gizmodo.com, 2 December 2009,
    http://gizmodo.com/5152141/google-proves-humanity-is-sick-and-sad-yet-absolutely-hilarious.

[^6]: See, https://twitter.com/search?q=%23sadgooglesearches&src=tren.

[^7]: Alexis Rhiannon, 'Other Sad Google Searches: Twitter Hashtag
    Trending', Crushable.com, 14 August 2013,
    http://www.crushable.com/2013/08/14/other-stuff/sad-google-searches-twitter-hashtag-trending.

[^8]: Thanks to Frédérick Belzile of BRUCE (http://vimeo.com/user5001083)
    for this insightful query.

[^9]: Mary Fairchild, '“Love is Patient, Love is Blind” Bible Verse',
    About.com Christianity,
    http://christianity.about.com/od/prayersverses/qt/Love-Is-Patient-Love-Is-Kind.htm.

[^10]: See, http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/love\_is\_all\_you\_need/.

[^11]: See, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j9J9rTZJBmw.

[^12]: Copies of the U2 music video are easily found on YouTube by
    searching ‘U2’ and the song title. For example, at the time of
    printing: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FLNFw9EYXOw.

[^13]: See, for example, the Jack White music video on Vimeo,
    http://vimeo.com/69265782.

[^14]: Benedict Anderson, *Imagined Communities*, London and New York: Verso,
    2006 (1983).

[^15]: See an iteration of Google nation here:
    http://www.googlenation.net/.

[^16]: ^^'Death is Nothing at all', Poemhunter.com, 28 November 2004,
    http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/death-is-nothing-at-all.

[^17]: See, https://soundcloud.com/clint-mansell/death-is-the-road-to-awe.

[^18]: See,
    http://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20090913085839AAP4KkP.

[^19]: See,
    http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/41499-death-is-not-the-greatest-loss-in-life-the-greatest.

[^20]: See,
    http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/80268-death-is-not-the-greatest-loss-in-life-the-greatest.

[^21]: Banana Yoshimoto, *Kitchen*, trans. Megan Backus, New York: Washington
    Square Press/Simon & Schuster Inc., 1993 (1988), p. 4.

[^22]: See, http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0772168/.

[^23]: See, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ssylkxyqB\_w.

[^24]: See, http://www.graceisoverrated.com/.

[^25]: Jake Paine, 'Webbie “Savage Life 4Ever” Release Date, Trill Fam
    “Respect Is A Must Tour” Dates', Hip Hop DX, 27 June 2013,
    http://www.hiphopdx.com/index/news/id.24471/title.webbie-savage-life-4ever-release-date-trill-fam-respect-is-a-must-tour-dates.

[^26]: See,
    http://www.lyrics007.com/Lauryn%20Hill%20Lyrics/Doo%20Wop%20(That%20Thing)%20Lyrics.html.

[^27]: See,
    http://www.amazon.com/Respect-Is-Burning-Various-Artists/dp/B00000D9VM.

[^28]: See,
    http://thinkexist.com/quotation/courage\_is\_not\_the\_absence\_of\_fear-but\_rather\_the/220774.html.

[^29]: 'Ernest Hemingway', BrainyQuote.com, Xplore Inc, 24 December 2013,
    http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/e/ernesthemi131094.html .

[^30]: 'Billy Graham', BrainyQuote.com, Xplore Inc, 24 December 2013,
    http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/b/billygraha113622.html .

[^31]: Sharon Ruhly, *Orientations to Intercultural Communication*, Chicago:
    Science Research Associates, 1976.

[^32]: Milton Bennett, 'Culture is Not Like an Iceberg', IDR Institute
    blog, 6 May 2013,
    http://www.idrinstitute.org/page.asp?menu1=14&post=1&page=1.

[^33]: Jeannette Winterson, *Written on the Body*, Toronto: Random House of
    Canada, 1992, p. 9.

[^34]: See, http://spectrum.library.concordia.ca/973890/.

[^35]: See, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6O6UqLnZqI.

[^36]: I collect, more generally, as people do, to recall and remember
    things. As a collector-scholar, I also collect (and sometimes it
    feels like hoarding) digital objects as a means of conducting
    research. My Desktop Archive
    (http://melhogan.com/website/show-me-your-desktop/) project was
    about seeing who would and wouldn't submit to the archive. A desktop
    can be (too) private to share. But it can also be tidied. Some
    people liked the project, but felt it exposed too much and so didn’t
    share it. So what I don't show of that project are the conversations
    – usually with warnings – that I get from people who submit to the
    project. There’s a lot of shame around the dirty desktop!

[^37]: See , http://screensaver.metazoa.org/about/.

[^38]: See,
    http://melhogan.com/website/google-suggestions-archive-of-human-sense.

[^39]: Mél Hogan, *Crashing the Archive: A Research-Creation Intervention
    into the SAW Video Mediatheque*, PhD thesis, Concordia University,
    201 2, http://spectrum.library.concordia.ca/973890/.

[^40]: See, http://archinodes.com/.

[^41]: See, http://melhogan.com/website/sept-boulderflood/.

[^42]: See, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6O6UqLnZqI.

[^43]: See ‘People this 2012 Hype is Shit!’,
    http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6O6UqLnZqI.

[^44]: Also see:
    http://www.salon.com/2013/10/20/new\_campaign\_uses\_real\_google\_searches\_to\_expose\_how\_the\_world\_talks\_about\_women/.

[^45]: Examples can be found at
    http://melhogan.com/website/comment-collection-what-is-this-pay-word-you-speak-of/
    and
    http://melhogan.com/website/comment-collection-les-sources-de-quoi-cheri/.

[^46]: Nora Young, *The Virtual Self: How Our Digital Lives Are Altering the
    World Around Us*, Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 2012. Also see
    http://norayoung.ca/.

[^47]: See Google Annual Search Statistics at
    http://www.statisticbrain.com/google-searches/.

[^48]: See the Google Guide Online, http://www.googleguide.com/.

[^49]: See , http://www.google.com/corporate/tech.html.

[^50]: Siva Vaidhyanathan, *The Googlization of Everything (And Why We
    Should Worry)*, Berkley: University of California Press, 2011.       

[^51]: Despite this trend, or direction, Vaidhyanathan points out that for
    the last decade, Google has provided an efficient tool for searches
    that facilitate access to the web for research – even if it is
    likely to move in the direction of catering to the user as consumer.

[^52]: Vanessa Fox, 'Google Realtime Search Goes Missing', Search Engine
    Land, 3 July 2011,

    http://searchengineland.com/google-realtime-search-goes-missing-84130.

[^53]: Danny Sullivan, 'What Is Real Time Search? Definitions & Players',
    Search Engine Land, 9 July 2009,
    http://searchengineland.com/what-is-real-time-search-definitions-players-22172.

[^54]: See, http://www.google.com/corporate/tech.html.

[^55]: See,
    http://www.google.de/intl/en/insidesearch/howsearchworks/crawling-indexing.html.

[^56]: Nancy Blachman and Jerry Peek, 'Cached Pages', Google Guide,
    http://www.googleguide.com/cached\_pages.html.

[^57]: John Battelle, *The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed Our Culture*, London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 2005.

[^58]: Jeffrey Beall argues this in 'How Google Uses Metadata to Improve
    Search Results', *The Serials Librarian* 59.1 (2010): 40-53.

[^59]: A similar discussion about Foucault and society is found in Lynne
    Huffer and Elizabeth Wilson, ‘Mad for Foucault: A Conversation’,
    *Theory, Culture & Society* 27 (2010): 324-338.

[^60]: Stefanie Olsen, 'Google Cache Raises Copyright Concerns', CNET News, 9
    July 2003 ^,^ http://news.cnet.com/2100-1038\_3-1024234.html.

[^61]: Olsen, 'Google Cache Raises Copyright Concerns'.



