{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\info
{\author Miriam Rasch}}\vieww12540\viewh14600\viewkind1\viewscale125
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sa240

\f0\b\fs22 \cf0 PROPOSAL FOR THE SOCIETY OF THE QUERY READER\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sa240

\b0 \cf0 Name: Astrid Mager\uc0\u8232 Institutional affiliations: Austrian Academy of Sciences\u8232 email: \cf2 \ul \ulc2 info@astridmager.org\cf0 \ulnone \uc0\u8232 Keywords: - alternative search\u8232 - privacy\u8232 - monopoly - freedom\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sa240

\b \cf0 Is small really beautiful? Big search and its alternatives
\b0 \
Google is big in many ways. The company has become one of the biggest in the world, it offers a myriad of services and products reaching from basic keyword search to futuristic glass technology, its PageRank algorithm is state of the art, it possesses the most comprehensive index of the web and the most extensive database of user data, it is the leader in online advertising, and it figures as search engine number one, at least in the Western world. In debates on big data the conventional argument is that big data needs big methods to be mined and made productive for users (boyd & Crawford 2011). In the light of big data Google may be seen as 
\i the 
\i0 big method to be applied when trying to bring order to the web, to find answers to questions, to sift through the sea of information. Surfing was yesterday, searching \'96 or rather Googling \'96 is today.\
It is thus not surprising that Google is a flourishing company and its algorithm incorporates and strengthens the capitalist ideology, as I have discussed in my previous work (Mager 2012). Rather than blaming Google for doing evil, however, I have suggested to think of Google as being shaped by society. Google shows us the face of capitalism because it was born and raised in a capitalist society. \'84Technology is society made durable\'93, as Bruno Latour (1991) put it straightforwardly. Accordingly, Google is not the only actor to blame. Quite on the contrary, figures like policy makers, jurists, journalists, search engine optimizers, website providers, and \'96 last but not least \'96 users are part of the game too. If users would turn away from Google the whole business model, including its sophisticated algorithm and \'84second index\'93 of personal data (Stalder and Mayer 2009), would fall apart. So why do people continue using Google if it does so much evil? The common anwer (even amongst search engine experts I interviewed) is because there are no real alternatives. But is that actually the case? What about all the other search projects trying to challenge Google and provide an alternative style of search?\
The task of this article is to critically examine and discuss a selection of so-called alternative search engines through the lens of ideology. If Google embodies the capitalist ideology what ideology do alternative (Western) search engines incorporate? What is green about green search engines like Forestle or Ecosia? May peer-to-peer or \'84social\'93 search engines like YaCy or the Pirate Bay be interpreted as communist search engines? Could search be seen as a metaphorical endevour as the image search engine YossarianLives! suggests (Pennink 2013)? What ideology do privacy-concerned search tools like DuckDuckGo follow? And finally, the ultimate question to be answered: Are smaller search engines really more beautiful than bigger ones? Or do small search engines also end up buying into \'84informational capitalism\'94 (Fuchs 2010) since big data requires big \'96 and hence commercial \'96 methods after all (by entering alliances with Google or Bing for example). \

\b Bio\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Astrid Mager, Dr. Phil, is a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute of Technology Assessement (ITA), Austrian Academy of Sciences, and a lecturer at the Department of Science and Technology Studies, University of Vienna. At present, she is leader of the project \'93Glocal Search. Search technology at the intersection of global capitalism and local socio-political cultures\'94 (funded by the Jubil\'e4umsfonds of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB), project number 14702). Her theoretical background is in Science and Technology Studies (STS) and her primary research interests include internet and society, search engine politics, knowledge production, privacy, digital methods, and critical theory. Recent publications: \'93Technoscientific promotion and biofuel policy. How the press and search engines stage the biofuel controversy\'94, in Media, Culture & Society, 2013 (together with Jenny Ekl\'f6f), \'93Algorithmic ideology. How capitalist society shapes search engines\'94, in Information, Communication & Society, 2012, \'93Search engines matter: From educating users towards engaging with online health information practices, Policy & Internet, 2012. Visit http://www.astridmager.net, email: astrid.mager@oeaw.ac.at.
\f0\fs22 \
}