Society of the Query Reader

Reflections on Web Search

Society of the Query Reader: Reflections on Web Search

Editors: René König and Miriam Rasch

Copy editing: Morgan Currie

Design: Katja van Stiphout

Cover design: Studio Inherent

Printer: Joh. Enschedé, Amsterdam

Publisher: Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam, 2014

ISBN: 978-90-818575-8-1

Contact

Institute of Network Cultures

phone: +31205951865

email: info@networkcultures.org

web: www.networkcultures.org

Order a copy or download this publication freely at:
www.networkcultures.org/publications/

Join the re-search mailing list about online search at:

http://listcultures.org/mailman/listinfo/re-search\_listcultures.org

Supported by: Create-IT, Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences
(Hogeschool van Amsterdam), Amsterdam Creative Industries Publishing,
and Stichting Democratie en Media.

Thanks to everyone at INC, to all of the authors for their
contributions, Morgan Currie for her copy editing, and to Stichting
Democratie en Media and Amsterdam Creative Industries Publishing for
their financial support.

This publication is licensed under Creative Commons

Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0).

To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/.

[cover]

Society of the Query Reader

Reflections on Web Search

Edited by René König and Miriam Rasch

INC Reader \#9

\
 **Previously published INC Readers:**

The INC Reader series is derived from conference contributions and
produced by the Institute of Network Cultures. They are available in
print and PDF form. The*Unlike Us Reader* is the eighth publication in
the series.

INC Reader \#8: Geert Lovink and Miriam Rasch (eds),

*Unlike Us: Social Media Monopolies and Their Alternatives*, 2013.

INC Reader \#7: Geert Lovink and Nathaniel Tkacz (eds),

*Critical Point of View: A Wikipedia Reader*, 2011.

INC Reader \#6: Geert Lovink and Rachel Somers Miles (eds),

*Video Vortex Reader II: Moving Images Beyond Youtube*, 2011.

INC Reader \#5: Scott McQuire, Meredith Martin and Sabine Niederer
(eds),

*Urban Screens Reader*, 2009.

INC Reader \#4: Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer (eds),

*Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube*, 2008.

INC Reader \#3: Geert Lovink and Ned Rossiter (eds),

*MyCreativity Reader: A Critique of Creative Industries*, 2007.

INC Reader \#2: Katrien Jacobs, Marije Janssen and Matteo Pasquinelli
(eds),

*C’LICK ME: A Netporn Studies Reader*,**2007.

INC Reader \#1: Geert Lovink and Soenke Zehle (eds),

*Incommunicado Reader*, 2005.

All INC Readers, and other publications like the Network Notebooks
Series and Theory on Demand, can be downloaded and read for free. See
www.networkcultures.org/publications.

\
 **CONTENTS**

René König and Miriam Rasch

Introduction to the Society of the Query Reader

POLITICS OF SEARCH ENGINE ARCHITECTURES

Kylie Jarrett

A Database of Intention?

Andrea Miconi      

Dialectics of Google

Vito Campanelli

Frictionless Sharing: The Rise of Automatic Criticism

GOOGLIZATION & ALTERNATIVES

Dirk Lewandowski

Why We Need an Independent Index of the Web

Astrid Mager

Is Small Really Beautiful? Big Search and Its Alternatives

Ippolita

The Dark Side of Google: Social Media Times

Angela Daly

Dominating Search: Google Before the Law

HISTORY AND FOUNDATIONS OF WEB SEARCH

Richard Graham

A ‘History’ of Search Engines: Mapping Technologies of Memory, Learning
and Discovery

Anton Tanter

Before Google: A Pre-History of Search Engines in Analogue Times

GLOBALIZATION AND LOCALIZATION

Min Jiang

Search Engine Censorship and Control in China. An interview with Min
Jiang

Anna Jobin and Olivier Glassey

I Am Not A Web Search Result! I Am A Free Word.' The Categorization and
Commodification of 'Switzerland' by Google

Amanda Scardamaglia

Keywords, Trademarks and Search Engine Liability

Martin Reiche and Ulrich Gehmann

Towards an Anthropology of Location-Based Recommendation and Search

RESEARCH AND EDUCATION

Jacob Ørmen

Historicizing Google Search: A Discussion of the Challenges Related to
Archiving Search Results****

Martin Feuz

Exploratory Search and Extended Cognition in Health Information
Interaction

Dave Crusoe

Educating for Search: Understanding the Past and Present Search
Technology to Teach for Future Resilience

Simon Knight

Finding Knowledge: What Is It To ‘Know’ When We Search?

CREATIVE REFLECTIONS

M.E. Luka and Mél Hogan

Polluted and Predictive, in 133 Words

Martina Mahnke and Emma Uprichard

Algorithming the Algorithm

Phil Jones and Aharon Amir

Search-Art: The Narcissus Search Engine, Skateboarding, and Oranges

APPENDICES

Society of the Query Conferences

Society of the Query I in Amsterdam

Society of the Query II in Amsterdam

Author Biographies

\
Appendix

SOCIETY OF THE QUERY I

November 13-14, 2009, TrouwAmsterdam

FRYIDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2009

10.15 – 12.30

Society of the Query

Moderator: Geert Lovink

Speakers: Yann Moulier Boutang (F), Matteo Pasquinelli (NL), Teresa
Numerico (IT), David Gugerli (CH)

**Book Presentation**: *Deep Search. The Politics of Search Beyond
Google* (Studienverlag & Transaction publishers, 2009)

Speaker: Konrad Becker

13.45 – 15.30

Digital Civil Rights

Moderator: Caroline Nevejan

Speakers: Joris van Hoboken (NL), Ippolita Collective (IT)

15.45 – 17.30

Alternative Search 1

Moderator: Eric Sieverts

Speakers: Matthew Fuller (UK), Cees Snoek (NL), Ingmar Weber (E)

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2009

10.00 – 12.30

Art and the Engine

Moderator: Sabine Niederer

Speakers: Lev Manovich (USA), Daniel van der Velden (NL), Christophe
Bruno (FR), Allessandro Ludovico (IT)

Flarf Performance

Ton van het Hof (NL)

13.45 – 15.30

Googlization

Introduction and moderation by Andrew Keen

Speakers: Siva Vaidhyanathan (US), Martin Feuz (CH), Esther Weltevrede
(NL)

15.45 – 17.30

Alternative Search 2

Moderator: Richard Rogers

Speakers: Florian Cramer (NL), Antoine Isaac, Steven Pemberton (NL)

20.30 – 23.30

Evening Program

host: Michael Stevenson (NL)

SOCIETY OF THE QUERY II

AMSTERDAM, THE NETHERLANDS

November 7-8, 2013, OBA Amsterdam

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2013

13.00 – 15.00

Google Domination

Moderator: René König

Speakers: Siva Vaidhyanathan (US), Astrid Mager (AT), Dirk Lewandowski
(GE)

15.15 – 16.30

Search across the border

Moderator: Steven Pemberton

Speakers: Thomas Petzold (GE), Min Jiang (US), Payal Arora (NL)

16.30 – 17.30

The Art of Search

Moderator: Renée Ridgway

Speakers: Rebecca Lieberman (US), Anja Groten (DE), Isabelle Massu (FR),
Rosa Menkman (NL)

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2009

10.00 – 12.15

Reflections on search

Moderation: Geert Lovink

Speakers: Kylie Jarett (IRE), Antoinette Rouvroy (BE), Anton Tantner
(AT)

12.15 – 12.30

**Book launch**

The Dark Side of Google by Ippolita (IT)

13.30 – 15.15

Search in context

Moderator: Jelte Timmer

Speakers: Simon Knight (UK), Sanne Koevoets (NL), Maarten Sprenger (NL)

15.45 – 17.30

The Filter Bubble Show

Moderator: Miriam Rasch

Speakers: Erik Borra (NL) en René König (GE), Pascal Jürgens (GE), Engin
Bozdag (NL)

21.00 – 1.00

Party: I’m Feeling Lucky

Roest, Amsterdam

\
Author Biographies

Aharon Amir Pug culpa bitters, you probably haven't heard of them duis
officia fingerstache farm-to-table lomo. Literally 3 wolf moon laboris,
asymmetrical Pinterest fashion axe hoodie id actually pariatur. Narwhal
ex ennui, leggings minim semiotics in art party Tumblr Schlitz. Mlkshk
est hella wolf placeat Bushwick. Labore assumenda hella magna enim
Portland. Non readymade aute id American Apparel paleo. Mustache Schlitz
fap +1.

Vito Campanelli is a writer and a new media theorist. His main research
interest is the technological imaginary. He is also a freelance curator
of digital culture events and co-founder of MAO – Media & Arts Office.
His essays on media art are regularly published in international
journals. http://vitocampanelli.eu

**Dave Crusoe**is Director of Academic Success - Technology for The Boys
& Girls Clubs of America, and is responsible for designing and
implementing technology education programs in support of the Movement.
Prior to this current role, he founded The Public Learning Media
Laboratory, which produced tools and resources to teach digital
literacy. He completed two degrees at the Harvard Graduate School of
Education and, if nobody is listening, plays old-time banjo.

**Angela Daly**is a research fellow in Swinburne University of
Technology's Institute for Social Research (Melbourne, Australia) and a
PhD candidate in the Department of Law at the European University
Institute (Florence, Italy) where she is finalizing a thesis on
'corporate dominance of online data flows'. Her research concerns the
intersection of law and technology, and her contribution to this reader
is based on a chapter of her PhD thesis providing a critical analysis of
the US and EU competition investigations into Google's online search and
advertising business.

**Vicențiu Dîngă**is a Romanian new media researcher and journalist
currently based in Amsterdam. He holds a Master’s degree in New Media
and Digital Culture (2013, University of Amsterdam) and has joined the
Institute of Network Cultures in August 2013, where he assisted in the
production of the Society of the Query conference and the MoneyLab
program. In parallel, he is independently working in social media
management and online marketing with various companies. In the past, he
has worked as a contributing editor for several publications and as a
project manager of one of the most important cultural cooperative
platforms in Romania, where he was taking care of specialized projects
and events. 

Martin Feuz is a PhD researcher at the Centre for Cultural Studies,
Goldsmiths, University of London and lecturer in Interaction Design at
Zurich University of the Arts. His research focuses on exploratory
search and health information interactions and how such interactions can
be meaningfully supported.

**Ulrich Gehmann**(Dipl.-Biol., lic. oec. HSG et MA History) is founder
of the working group »Formatting of Social Spaces« at University of
Karlsruhe and editor-in-chief of the journal *New Frontiers in Spatial
Concepts*. http://ejournal.uvka.de/spatialconcepts

Olivier Glassey Ea scenester bicycle rights, cornhole chambray ullamco
swag Odd Future. DIY mlkshk yr chambray 3 wolf moon labore. Cupidatat
minim forage raw denim leggings, cornhole vero nihil Shoreditch YOLO
culpa cillum nisi shabby chic. Deep v iPhone laborum occaecat culpa duis
kitsch, tempor enim selvage wayfarers Shoreditch PBR aliqua Helvetica.
Ea duis fashion axe, Carles letterpress nihil 3 wolf moon Williamsburg
wayfarers DIY sint cupidatat photo booth. Fanny pack Brooklyn paleo,
keffiyeh small batch Etsy Banksy nisi messenger bag tofu. McSweeney's
Pinterest sustainable, qui distillery pour-over reprehenderit meh
proident aliqua post-ironic.

Richard Graham is a PhD candidate in English (with specialism in Digital
Humanities) at the University of Exeter, England. His research topic
focuses on the ways in which search engines change our conceptions of
thought and knowledge. He also teaches modules in critical theory and
literature at Exeter. Outside of academia, Richard uses his skills
developed from his digital humanities research to build and maintain
databases for local heritage and archival centres, most recently working
on 16th Century minute books concerning the wool and cloth trade in
Exeter. He blogs at http://richardnvgraham.blogspot.co.uk/ and tweets
from @richardnvgraham.

**Mél Hogan**is Postdoctoral Fellow in Digital Curation at the
University of Colorado – Boulder, CO. Her current research is at the
intersection of media, archives and the environment. Her most recent
publications revolve around media and ecological impacts, data storage
centers, media archaeologies, queer and feminist design, and the
politics of preservation. As a practitioner, aspects of these same
issues are addressed through media arts interventions and research
design projects. Hogan is also the art director of online and p.o.d.
journal of arts and politics, nomorepotlucks.org; on the advisory board
of the Fembot collective; a Faculty Fellow at the Media Archaeology Lab,
and a research design consultant for mat3rial.com and archinodes.com.
Hogan recently completed her mandate of 6 years on the administrative
board of Studio XX. 

Ippolita is an international collective for convivial research and
writings. Investigations and workshop topics include: (reality) hacking,
free software and philosophy and anthropology of technologies. As a
heteronomous identity, Ippolita published ‘Open Is Not Free’ (2005, it);
‘The Dark Side of Google’ (2007; it-fr-es-en); ‘In the Facebook
Aquarium: The Resistible Rise of Anarcho-Capitalism (2012; it-es-fr).
Ippolita’s independent server provides their copyleft works, exploring
the cutting edge ‘technologies of domination’ with their social effects.
Forthcoming project: Algocracies. Or, how Masters of Clouds are becoming
Gods. www.ippolita.net & info@ippolita.net

Kylie Jarrett is a lecturer in Multimedia at the Centre for Media
Studies at the National University of Ireland, Maynooth, responsible for
teaching modules on digital media. Her research interest is critical
analysis of commercial digital media, in particular those forms referred
to as social media.. Her current research is focussed on applying
feminist labour theories in understanding consumer labour in digital
media contexts. She has recently published with colleagues a study of
Google and the culture of search, and she has also published on YouTube
and eBay. Her doctoral study investigated the discourse of consumer
empowerment in the field of e-commerce, using semiotics and
sociolinguistics to explore this representation.

Min Jiang is Associate Professor of Communication and Research Affiliate
at the Center for Global Communication Studies, University of
Pennsylvania. She teaches graduate and undergraduate courses in new
media technology, global media and research methods. Her research
focuses on the intersections of Chinese Internet technologies, politics
and policies. Her work is highly interdisciplinary, blending new media
studies, political communication, international communication, legal
studies, and information science, focusing on Chinese digital
technologies (search engines, microblogging), internet policies, social
activism, and digital diplomacy. A recipient of over a dozen research
grants, she was the first Research Fellow at UNC Charlotte’s Center for
Humanities, Technology, and Science, a faculty member of the 2009
Annenberg-Oxford Summer Institute and a finalist in 2009 Knight News
Challenge. She received her Ph.D. in Communication from Purdue
University in 2007. Prior to pursuing her doctor’s degree in the U.S.,
she worked as an international news editor for BTV and CCTV as well as
assistant to director for Kill Bill I in China.

Anna Jobin Cred irure leggings, tousled roof party nesciunt elit
church-key sed bitters McSweeney's vinyl. Brooklyn lomo mumblecore +1
ennui, you probably haven't heard of them irure tousled. Whatever ugh
typewriter veniam, semiotics bespoke nulla. Single-origin coffee qui
street art in polaroid. Proident leggings shabby chic placeat blog small
batch nulla. Four loko whatever quis excepteur, in veniam mixtape ennui.
Master cleanse ethical occaecat sriracha plaid, hoodie cardigan
single-origin coffee anim occupy Portland pork belly placeat est
actually.

**Phil Jones**(http://synaesmedia.net/) is a programmer, digital artist
and electronic musician. He plays with the Brasilia Laptop Orchestra
(BSBLOrk) and organizes ‘Lago Lounge’, an electronic music meet-up. Phil
also works on software for defining physical objects and machines that
are suitable for fabricating with 3d printers or laser-cutters.
(Recently exhibited in ObjectOriented II at the Galeria Espaço Piloto
IdA/UnB, Brasilia.) Phil has collaborated with Aharon Amir for several
years, co-creating the Narcissus Search Engine, co-organizing the
monthly Art & Chat meet-ups in Brighton, and recently installing the
BomBane's CommunityBox Gallery in a local cafe.

**Simon Knight**‘s research focuses on student’s epistemic practices in
information seeking. Following teaching high school philosophy and
psychology, he completed his MA in philosophy of education exploring the
implications of the ‘extended mind’ thesis for our understanding of
knowledge and its assessment. That work particularly focussed on the
Danish use of internet in examinations, asking the question ‘Is
Wikipedia a part of my extended mind?’ He then completed an MPhil in
Educational research, focussing on the epistemic dialogue children used
in collaborative information seeking tasks. His PhD work at the UK’s
Open University continues this line of research, applying learning
analytic techniques to the exploration of epistemic dialogue and
commitments in collaborative information seeking. He tweets @sjgknight
and blogs at http://people.kmi.open.ac.uk/knight/.

**Dirk Lewandowski**is a professor of information research and
information retrieval at the Hamburg University of Applied Sciences.
Prior to that, he worked as an independent consultant and as a part-time
lecturer at the Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf. His research
interests are Web Information Retrieval and users’ interaction with Web
search engines.

**Mary Elizabeth (M.E.) Luka**is an award-winning documentary
producer-director for television and digital media including as founder
of CBC ArtSpots. As a Vanier Canada Graduate Scholar and doctoral
candidate (ABD) wrapping up her doctoral work in Communication and Media
at Concordia University, she probes the work of artists in relation to
broadcasting and digital media. Deeply involved with the culture and
education sectors as a strategic planning consultant including Canadian
Public Arts Funders and Women in Film and Television-Atlantic, she is
also a leadership volunteer with Arts Nova Scotia (founding Vice-Chair),
Creative Nova Scotia Leadership Council and the NSCAD University Board
of Governors. 

**Astrid Mager**Dr. Phil, is a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute
of Technology Assessement (ITA), Austrian Academy of Sciences, and a
lecturer at the Department of Science and Technology Studies, University
of Vienna. At present, she is leader of the project “Glocal Search.
Search technology at the intersection of global capitalism and local
socio-political cultures” (funded by the Jubiläumsfonds of the
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB), project number 14702). Her
theoretical background is in Science and Technology Studies (STS) and
her primary research interests include internet and society, search
engine politics, knowledge production, privacy, digital methods, and
critical theory. Recent publications: “Technoscientific promotion and
biofuel policy. How the press and search engines stage the biofuel
controversy”, in Media, Culture & Society, 2013 (together with Jenny
Eklöf), “Algorithmic ideology. How capitalist society shapes search
engines”, in Information, Communication & Society, 2012, “Search engines
matter: From educating users towards engaging with online health
information practices, Policy & Internet, 2012. Visit
http://www.astridmager.net, email: astrid.mager@oeaw.ac.at.

**Martina Mahnke**is a PhD Fellow at the University of Erfurt/Germany,
currently visiting the Center for Communication and Computing at the
University of Copenhagen/Denmark. Her research is located at the
crossroad of communication and computer science and deals with the
question of how algorithms and human are communicatively interrelated.
In particular, she is interested in the underlying socio-technical
dynamics of ‘algorithmic media’.

**Andrea Miconi**teaches Media Studies and Sociology of Culture at IULM
University, Milan, and The Network Society at the University of Lugano,
Switzerland. He had been visiting lecturer at Communication & Arts
School of Sao Paulo University, Brazil. His research is mainly focused
on media history and critical Internet theory.

**Jacob Ørmen**is a PhD Fellow at the University of Copenhagen
(Department of Media, Cognition and Communication). Jacob researches
individuals' engagement with political news and their propensity to
deliberate politics both face-to-face and through various media. The PhD
is part of a wider research project on cross-media communication in the
digital age called ”Meaning across media – Cross-media communication and
co-creation”. Jacob is also interested in empirical methods
(particularly newer digital forms), digital humanities and communication
theory. He has background as a communication advisor and holds a MA in
political science from Central European University as well as a BA in
history from University of Copenhagen.

**Martin Reiche** is an audiovisual artist living and working in Berlin,
Germany. http://www.martinreiche.com

**Amanda Scardamaglia**completed her LLB (Hons) and BA at The University
of Melbourne before being admitted to practice as an Australian Legal
Practitioner in the Supreme Court of Victoria. More recently, she
completed her PhD at The University of Melbourne, entitled ‘A History of
Trade Mark Law: The Colonial Trade Mark Regime’. Her research is in the
area of trade mark law, especially the historical development of trade
mark law, as well as the use of trade marks in internet search and
advertising.

**Anton Tanter**is lecturer at the Department of History at Universität
Wien. His research interests include the history of
intelligence/registry offices in Europe, house numbering, and new media
in historical sciences. In 2004 he defended a dissertation about the
history of the census and house numbering in the Habsburg monarchy that
was published in 2007 as Ordnung der Häuser, Beschreibung der Seelen.
Hausnummerierung und Seelenkonskription in der Habsburger-monarchie
(=Wiener Schriften zur Geschichte der Neuzeit; 4). Innsbruck/Wien/Bozen:
Studienverlag, 2007. www.tantner.net

Emma Uprichard is Associate Professor at the Centre for
Interdisciplinary Methodologies at the University of Warwick. She is
director of the Warwick Q-Step Centre for the advancement of
quantitative methods in the social sciences. She is co-editor with David
Byrne of four volumes on 'Cluster Analysis' (Sage, 2012). She is
especially interested in developing new methods and methodologies
relating to studying complex socio-spatial and temporal change. Her
substantive research interests include: methods, time, childhood, food,
and cities.

[flaptekst]

Society of the Query Reader

Reflections on Web Search

Edited by René König and Miriam Rasch

INC Reader \#9

Looking up something online is one of the most common applications of
the web. Whether with a laptop or smartphone, we search the web from
wherever we are, at any given moment. ‘Googling’ has become so entwined
in our daily routines that we rarely question it. However, search
engines such as Google or Bing determine what part of the web we get to
see, shaping our knowledge and perceptions of the world. But there is a
world beyond Google – geographically, culturally, and technologically.

The Society of the Query network was founded in 2009 to delve into the
larger societal and cultural consequences that are triggered by search
technology. In this Reader, which is published after two conferences
held in Amsterdam in 2009 and 2013, twenty authors – new media scholars,
historians, computer scientists, and artists – try to answer a number of
pressing questions about online search. What are the foundations of web
search? What ideologies and assumptions are inscribed in search engine
algorithms? What solution can be formulated to deal with Google’s
monopoly in the future? Are alternatives to Google even thinkable? What
influence does online search have on education practices? How do artists
use the abundance of data that search engines provide in their creative
work? By bringing researchers together from a variety of relevant
disciplines, we aim at opening up new perspectives on the Society of the
Query.

www.networkcultures.org/query

**Contributors:** Aharon Amir, Vito Campanelli, Dave Crusoe, Angela
Daly, Vicențiu Dîngă, Martin Feuz, Ulrich Gehmann, Olivier Glassey,
Richard Graham, Mél Hogan, Ippolita, Kylie Jarrett, Min Jiang, Anna
Jobin, Phil Jones, Simon Knight, Dirk Lewandowski, M.E. Luka, Astrid
Mager, Martina Mahnke, Andrea Miconi, Jacob Ørmen, Martin Reiche, Amanda
Scardamaglia, Anton Tanter, and Emma Uprichard.

Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam 2014

ISBN 978-90-818575-8-1

[Logo’s: ]

INC | Create-it | HvA | Stichting Democratie en Media | Amsterdam
Creative Industries Publishing

