---
Title: Author Biographies
---

**Aharon Amir** graduated from Brighton University’s visual & performing arts, and continued to question and practice performance in digital and network environments. Through time Aharon’s work moved from performative acts, to project making, and through to development of imagination and search technologies. Since late 80s, Aharon has presented in conferences and galleries (e.g., Conciousness-Reframed, Performance-Philosophy, Philadelphia ICA, Mediterranean Biennale); created and co-developed events and participation contexts (e.g., art and chat monthly, art-as-political-uselessnes ssymposium, future-of-production conference); co-created Narcissus (searchnarcissus.net) – award-winning search engine algorithm for dark data; developed events and projects with Interactive-TV, cultural websites, collaborative organisations, and educational organisations (e.g., Digihub, Lighthouse and Basekamp)

**Vito Campanelli** is a writer and a new media theorist. His main research
interest is the technological imaginary. He is also a freelance curator
of digital culture events and co-founder of MAO – Media & Arts Office.
His essays on media art are regularly published in international
journals. http://vitocampanelli.eu

**Dave Crusoe** is Director of Academic Success – Technology for The Boys
& Girls Clubs of America, and is responsible for designing and
implementing technology education programs in support of the Movement.
Prior to this current role, he founded The Public Learning Media
Laboratory, which produced tools and resources to teach digital
literacy. He completed two degrees at the Harvard Graduate School of
Education and, if nobody is listening, plays old-time banjo.

**Angela Daly** is a research fellow in Swinburne University of
Technology's Institute for Social Research (Melbourne, Australia) and a
PhD candidate in the Department of Law at the European University
Institute (Florence, Italy) where she is finalizing a thesis on
'corporate dominance of online data flows'. Her research concerns the
intersection of law and technology, and her contribution to this reader
is based on a chapter of her PhD thesis providing a critical analysis of
the US and EU competition investigations into Google's online search and
advertising business.

**Vicențiu Dîngă** is a Romanian new media researcher and journalist
currently based in Amsterdam. He holds a Master’s degree in New Media
and Digital Culture (2013, University of Amsterdam) and has joined the
Institute of Network Cultures in August 2013, where he assisted in the
production of the Society of the Query conference and the MoneyLab
program. In parallel, he is independently working in social media
management and online marketing with various companies. In the past, he
has worked as a contributing editor for several publications and as a
project manager of one of the most important cultural cooperative
platforms in Romania, where he was taking care of specialized projects
and events. 

**Martin Feuz** is a PhD researcher at the Centre for Cultural Studies,
Goldsmiths, University of London and lecturer in Interaction Design at
Zurich University of the Arts. His research focuses on exploratory
search and health information interactions and how such interactions can
be meaningfully supported.

**Ulrich Gehmann** (Dipl.-Biol., lic. oec. HSG et MA History) is founder
of the working group Formatting of Social Spaces at University of
Karlsruhe and editor-in-chief of the journal *New Frontiers in Spatial
Concepts*. http://ejournal.uvka.de/spatialconcepts

**Olivier Glassey** is a sociologist, senior lecturer and researcher at the Observatory Science, Policy and Society (OSPS) and at the Laboratory of Digital Cultures and Humanities (LaDHUL) at the University of Lausanne, Switzerland. He studies online mass collaboration and emergent collective behaviors in several domains (social norms, distributed production of knowledge, user driven innovation, open classification and video games). He is currently working on collective memory production, the materiality of online social interactions and the sociology of big data.

**Richard Graham** is a PhD candidate in English (with specialism in Digital
Humanities) at the University of Exeter, England. His research topic
focuses on the ways in which search engines change our conceptions of
thought and knowledge. He also teaches modules in critical theory and
literature at Exeter. Outside of academia, Richard uses his skills
developed from his digital humanities research to build and maintain
databases for local heritage and archival centres, most recently working
on 16th Century minute books concerning the wool and cloth trade in
Exeter. He blogs at http://richardnvgraham.blogspot.co.uk/ and tweets
from @richardnvgraham.

**Mél Hogan** is Postdoctoral Fellow in Digital Curation at the
University of Colorado – Boulder, CO. Her current research is at the
intersection of media, archives and the environment. Her most recent
publications revolve around media and ecological impacts, data storage
centers, media archaeologies, queer and feminist design, and the
politics of preservation. As a practitioner, aspects of these same
issues are addressed through media arts interventions and research
design projects. Hogan is also the art director of online and p.o.d.
journal of arts and politics, nomorepotlucks.org; on the advisory board
of the Fembot collective; a Faculty Fellow at the Media Archaeology Lab,
and a research design consultant for mat3rial.com and archinodes.com.
Hogan recently completed her mandate of 6 years on the administrative
board of Studio XX. 

**Ippolita** is an international collective for convivial research and
writings. Investigations and workshop topics include: (reality) hacking,
free software and philosophy and anthropology of technologies. As a
heteronomous identity, Ippolita published ‘Open Is Not Free’ (2005, it);
‘The Dark Side of Google’ (2007; it-fr-es-en); ‘In the Facebook
Aquarium: The Resistible Rise of Anarcho-Capitalism (2012; it-es-fr).
Ippolita’s independent server provides their copyleft works, exploring
the cutting edge ‘technologies of domination’ with their social effects.
Forthcoming project: Algocracies. Or, how Masters of Clouds are becoming
Gods. www.ippolita.net & info@ippolita.net

**Kylie Jarrett** is a lecturer in Multimedia at the Centre for Media
Studies at the National University of Ireland, Maynooth, responsible for
teaching modules on digital media. Her research interest is critical
analysis of commercial digital media, in particular those forms referred
to as social media.. Her current research is focussed on applying
feminist labour theories in understanding consumer labour in digital
media contexts. She has recently published with colleagues a study of
Google and the culture of search, and she has also published on YouTube
and eBay. Her doctoral study investigated the discourse of consumer
empowerment in the field of e-commerce, using semiotics and
sociolinguistics to explore this representation.

**Min Jiang** is Associate Professor of Communication and Research Affiliate
at the Center for Global Communication Studies, University of
Pennsylvania. She teaches graduate and undergraduate courses in new
media technology, global media and research methods. Her research
focuses on the intersections of Chinese Internet technologies, politics
and policies. Her work is highly interdisciplinary, blending new media
studies, political communication, international communication, legal
studies, and information science, focusing on Chinese digital
technologies (search engines, microblogging), internet policies, social
activism, and digital diplomacy. A recipient of over a dozen research
grants, she was the first Research Fellow at UNC Charlotte’s Center for
Humanities, Technology, and Science, a faculty member of the 2009
Annenberg-Oxford Summer Institute and a finalist in 2009 Knight News
Challenge. She received her Ph.D. in Communication from Purdue
University in 2007. Prior to pursuing her doctor’s degree in the U.S.,
she worked as an international news editor for BTV and CCTV as well as
assistant to director for Kill Bill I in China.

**Anna Jobin** is a researcher at the Laboratory of Digital Cultures and Humanities (LaDHUL) at the University of Lausanne, Switzerland. She is interested in sociology, algorithms, and everything in between.

**Phil Jones** (http://synaesmedia.net/) is a programmer, digital artist
and electronic musician. He plays with the Brasilia Laptop Orchestra
(BSBLOrk) and organizes ‘Lago Lounge’, an electronic music meet-up. Phil
also works on software for defining physical objects and machines that
are suitable for fabricating with 3d printers or laser-cutters.
(Recently exhibited in ObjectOriented II at the Galeria Espaço Piloto
IdA/UnB, Brasilia.) Phil has collaborated with Aharon Amir for several
years, co-creating the Narcissus Search Engine, co-organizing the
monthly Art & Chat meet-ups in Brighton, and recently installing the
BomBane's CommunityBox Gallery in a local cafe.

**Simon Knight**'s research focuses on student’s epistemic practices in
information seeking. Following teaching high school philosophy and
psychology, he completed his MA in philosophy of education exploring the
implications of the ‘extended mind’ thesis for our understanding of
knowledge and its assessment. That work particularly focussed on the
Danish use of internet in examinations, asking the question ‘Is
Wikipedia a part of my extended mind?’ He then completed an MPhil in
Educational research, focussing on the epistemic dialogue children used
in collaborative information seeking tasks. His PhD work at the UK’s
Open University continues this line of research, applying learning
analytic techniques to the exploration of epistemic dialogue and
commitments in collaborative information seeking. He tweets @sjgknight
and blogs at http://people.kmi.open.ac.uk/knight/.

**René König** is a sociologist researching at the Institute for Technology
Assessment and Systems Analysis (ITAS), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.
He is interested in online knowledge hierarchies and he focuses on
transformation processes in academia triggered by Web 2.0. He co-edited this
volume and the Society of the Query #2 conference. Website: renekoenig.eu.

**Dirk Lewandowski** is a professor of information research and
information retrieval at the Hamburg University of Applied Sciences.
Prior to that, he worked as an independent consultant and as a part-time
lecturer at the Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf. His research
interests are Web Information Retrieval and users’ interaction with Web
search engines.

**Mary Elizabeth (M.E.) Luka** is an award-winning documentary
producer-director for television and digital media including as founder
of CBC ArtSpots. As a Vanier Canada Graduate Scholar and doctoral
candidate (ABD) wrapping up her doctoral work in Communication and Media
at Concordia University, she probes the work of artists in relation to
broadcasting and digital media. Deeply involved with the culture and
education sectors as a strategic planning consultant including Canadian
Public Arts Funders and Women in Film and Television-Atlantic, she is
also a leadership volunteer with Arts Nova Scotia (founding Vice-Chair),
Creative Nova Scotia Leadership Council and the NSCAD University Board
of Governors. 

**Astrid Mager** Dr. Phil, is a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute
of Technology Assessement (ITA), Austrian Academy of Sciences, and a
lecturer at the Department of Science and Technology Studies, University
of Vienna. At present, she is leader of the project “Glocal Search.
Search technology at the intersection of global capitalism and local
socio-political cultures” (funded by the Jubiläumsfonds of the
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB), project number 14702). Her
theoretical background is in Science and Technology Studies (STS) and
her primary research interests include internet and society, search
engine politics, knowledge production, privacy, digital methods, and
critical theory. Recent publications: “Technoscientific promotion and
biofuel policy. How the press and search engines stage the biofuel
controversy”, in Media, Culture & Society, 2013 (together with Jenny
Eklöf), “Algorithmic ideology. How capitalist society shapes search
engines”, in Information, Communication & Society, 2012, “Search engines
matter: From educating users towards engaging with online health
information practices, Policy & Internet, 2012. Visit
http://www.astridmager.net, email: astrid.mager@oeaw.ac.at.

**Martina Mahnke** is a PhD Fellow at the University of Erfurt/Germany,
currently visiting the Center for Communication and Computing at the
University of Copenhagen/Denmark. Her research is located at the
crossroad of communication and computer science and deals with the
question of how algorithms and human are communicatively interrelated.
In particular, she is interested in the underlying socio-technical
dynamics of ‘algorithmic media’.

**Andrea Miconi** teaches Media Studies and Sociology of Culture at IULM
University, Milan, and The Network Society at the University of Lugano,
Switzerland. He had been visiting lecturer at Communication & Arts
School of Sao Paulo University, Brazil. His research is mainly focused
on media history and critical Internet theory.

**Jacob Ørmen** is a PhD Fellow at the University of Copenhagen
(Department of Media, Cognition and Communication). Jacob researches
individuals' engagement with political news and their propensity to
deliberate politics both face-to-face and through various media. The PhD
is part of a wider research project on cross-media communication in the
digital age called ”Meaning across media – Cross-media communication and
co-creation”. Jacob is also interested in empirical methods
(particularly newer digital forms), digital humanities and communication
theory. He has background as a communication advisor and holds a MA in
political science from Central European University as well as a BA in
history from University of Copenhagen.

**Miriam Rasch** started working as a publication manager at the Institute of Network Cultures in June 2012. She holds a masters degree in Literary Studies (2002) and Philosophy (2005). Since graduating she worked as a (web) editor and from 2008 on as a programmer for the public lectures department at Utrecht University, Studium Generale. Next to that she worked as a lecturer for Liberal Arts and Sciences, and is teaching philosophy and media theory at the Media, Information and Communication department. She writes book reviews and guest posts for different websites and magazines; her personal blog can be found on miriamrasch.nl.

**Martin Reiche** is an audiovisual artist living and working in Berlin,
Germany. http://www.martinreiche.com

**Amanda Scardamaglia** completed her LLB (Hons) and BA at The University
of Melbourne before being admitted to practice as an Australian Legal
Practitioner in the Supreme Court of Victoria. More recently, she
completed her PhD at The University of Melbourne, entitled ‘A History of
Trade Mark Law: The Colonial Trade Mark Regime’. Her research is in the
area of trade mark law, especially the historical development of trade
mark law, as well as the use of trade marks in internet search and
advertising.

**Anton Tanter** is lecturer at the Department of History at Universität
Wien. His research interests include the history of
intelligence/registry offices in Europe, house numbering, and new media
in historical sciences. In 2004 he defended a dissertation about the
history of the census and house numbering in the Habsburg monarchy that
was published in 2007 as Ordnung der Häuser, Beschreibung der Seelen.
Hausnummerierung und Seelenkonskription in der Habsburger-monarchie
(=Wiener Schriften zur Geschichte der Neuzeit; 4). Innsbruck/Wien/Bozen:
Studienverlag, 2007. www.tantner.net

**Emma Uprichard** is Associate Professor at the Centre for
Interdisciplinary Methodologies at the University of Warwick. She is
director of the Warwick Q-Step Centre for the advancement of
quantitative methods in the social sciences. She is co-editor with David
Byrne of four volumes on 'Cluster Analysis' (Sage, 2012). She is
especially interested in developing new methods and methodologies
relating to studying complex socio-spatial and temporal change. Her
substantive research interests include: methods, time, childhood, food,
and cities.