---
Title: "Search Control in China"
Author: "Min Jiang and Vicențiu Dîngă"
---

Min Jiang is an Associate Professor of Communication at UNC Charlotte
and an affiliate researcher at the Center for Global Communication
Studies, University of Pennsylvania. Min Jiang was a speaker at the
second edition of the Society of the Query conference in Amsterdam, 7-8
November 2013. She participated in the session called ‘Search Across the
Border’, where she talked about borders on web search in China,
expanding on her previous research on search results in China.

**Vicențiu Dîngă: Firstly, I’d like to talk about your work
involving the comparative study of Baidu and Google’s search results in
China. Could you tell me more about this research?**

Min Jiang: The impetus for this research came from my own varied
experiences with search engines in China, the U.S. and elsewhere. How is
search experienced differently became a question that I wanted to
explore. Search engines are interesting media to me. They are an
important interface between the user and available knowledge and
information. More interestingly, they are also popularly regarded as
neutral and almost god-like while search’s political and commercial
nature is often downplayed. I explored this aspect in the Chinese
context. In an article published in *New Media & Society* I compare
Baidu’s and Google’s search results in China, focusing on a few aspects:
search filtering, ranking, overlap, and bias.[^1]

First, we know that filtering has always been an issue with the Chinese
internet, and search filtering is a part of it. Google, upon entering
China in 2006, consented to filtering. But in January 2010, Google
announced that it would stop censoring its search results in mainland
China because of security threats. Subsequently Google moved its servers
to Hong Kong because the region is a free speech zone in China. Many
suspected the censorship burden shifted from Google to the ‘Great
Firewall’, a filtering infrastructure erected at the Chinese borders so
that international information coming through can be filtered (‘The
Great Firewall of China’ is the colloquial term for the ‘Golden Shield
Project’), but nobody knew how effective the Great Firewall was. Part of
my data shows that there were quite complex filtering patterns in China.
Top 10 search results from both Google China and Baidu were collected
inside mainland China in late 2010 using 316 popular event keywords. The
table below indicates that after Google left mainland China, the
filtering burden indeed shifted to the Chinese state. While
inaccessibility of Baidu’s search results was caused mainly by broken
links, for Google, it was largely because of filtering by the Great
Firewall. Baidu also performs this task of filtering as Chinese laws
mandate content filtering by commercial operators within its borders.
So, Baidu filters too, but its filtering patterns are much subtler and
more nuanced than that performed by the Great Firewall.

[IMG1]
("Table 1. Distribution of Baidu and Google’s Link Accessibility (2011).")

Second, in terms of search results overlapping and ranking, I found
Google and Baidu are actually quite different. Based on the search
results of 316 popular Chinese events, the overlap, or the appearances
of the same URL in top 10 search results from both search engines, is
quite low. Maybe this is not so shocking to those of us who study search
engines, but for the general public, an overlap of search results
between Google and Baidu of less than 7% might come as a big surprise.
This tells us that based on the search engine you use, your search
results and the knowledge you obtain as a result can vary in significant
ways. When it comes to news and current events, search engines can be
quite important in shaping what we know.

With regard to search bias, I focused on self-bias, or the extent to
which a search engine links search results to its own content. This is
because, as we know, Google and Baidu are no longer only search engines;
they offer many other related information products and services. For
instance, Baidu owns Q&A websites and real time messaging services. It
has incentives to direct searchers to its own content, with effective
regulation or strong competition absent. At the time of my study in late
2010, it turned out that Baidu rarely links to Chinese Wikipedia or
other competitors in China, but often to Baidu Baike, its own
Wikipedia-like service. On the other hand, Google back then was more
likely to link to Chinese Wikipedia. It seems at times that Chinese
Wikipedia is Google’s default choice even though Chinese domestic
competitor Hudong Baike was more popular with many more entries and
users at the time. The latter case is not about Google’s favored
treatment of its own service, but its preferences certainly shaped
users’ information experiences and outcomes. In a follow-up study with a
component examining Google’s linking patterns to Wikipedia-type
services, I found Google has since shifted its
strategy.[^2] Based on the longitudinal data I collected
in 2011 and 2012, Google no longer seems to privilege Chinese Wikipedia
and instead has given Baidu Baike and Hudong Baike an almost equal
chance in mainland China.

Search bias is a real concern. Even Chinese official media CCTV has
exposed Baidu for punishing advertisers who refused to pay for their
search rankings. I think this issue will persist as long as search
engines remain a critical information access point in our societies.
More and more people will start to realize this is a huge problem. While
China’s political and market situation may be somewhat unique, search
bias and unfair business practices can occur in every information
society and market.

**VD: How do these search engines behave throughout China?**

MJ: Although search results can vary for a variety of reasons, regional
differences are notable. Search results in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Macau,
for instance, differ in important ways from those retrieved from
mainland China. This is not only because of politics, but also because
of linguistic and cultural differences among other things. As an
example, Hong Kong, previously a British colony, was returned to
mainland China in 1997 but the two regions remain distinct under the
‘one country, two systems’ principle (where Hong Kong practices a
capitalist economic and political system and mainland uses a socialist
one). In Hong Kong, local laws continue to protect free speech – that’s
why Google moved its servers there and to this day is able to remain in
‘China’. The legal systems in these regions differ in marked ways from
mainland China’s. Linguistically, Hong Kong natives continue to speak
Cantonese and Taiwan natives Taiwanese. Traditional Chinese characters
are more commonly used in Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan rather than
simplified Chinese characters, the latter used more dominantly in
mainland China. In all its complexity, the notion of China may include
Hong Kong, Macau, and often Taiwan (although mainland and Taiwan still
have unresolved territorial and political disputes). These historical
legacies continue to shape how search is used and regulated today. In
the Chinese case, search tends to conform to these linguistic, cultural
and legal boundaries rather than transcending them. Search is
re-territorialized rather than de-territorialized. My colleague Han-Teng
Liao from Oxford’s Internet Research Institute has a paper that
discusses the different patterns of search results that one gets in
Chinese-speaking regions including mainland China, Hong Kong and
Taiwan.[^3]

**VD: In your presentation for the Society of the Query conference you
stated that ‘the popular depiction of the search engine as a borderless,
global medium is an illusion’. Can you expand on that?**

MJ: Yes. I believe there is a huge gap between what we think search can
offer versus how we use it in reality. We have this dream, almost a
fantasy, that search engines are a borderless and global medium. In
reality, I think our experiences are very much conditioned by our
location, by who we are, how we search, and what we know. In many ways,
search is more local or parochial, if you will, rather than cosmopolitan
or global. Search engines are popularly mentioned in the same breath as
the internet as part of a *global village*, a McLuhanian dream built on
an information system radiating throughout the world, producing positive
outcomes. As with any new technology, however, as time went by, more and
more governments also started to figure out how to use law and other
means to set the boundaries for search and in extreme cases to filter
any undesirable content. Structurally, we have a global digital
infrastructure that is more or less connected, but in terms of content
and information flows, I think it’s quite a local or national experience
for many, especially in countries such as China. At the inception of the
internet and search engines, those who were able to use them were more
educated and cosmopolitan to begin with. Today, in China alone, there
are almost 600 million internet users and 450 million searchers. For
many, their search experiences are not at all as borderless as
projected.

Borders are frames. People think about them often in terms of physical
borders and territory. On the internet, there are no physical borders;
borders are invisible. In the realm of search, various search engines
employ complex criteria to collect, sort, rank, and present results to
us, adopting certain factors and excluding others, operating largely in
secrecy and expanding their collection of user data to ever more
spheres. Eli Pariser describes such criteria or algorithms as ‘filters’
and the resulting state of individualized information as ‘filter
bubbles’.[^4]

Geo-linguistic borders, the kinds of existing differences in location
and language, for instance those between Chinese mainland, Hong Kong,
and Taiwan as noted previously, certainly form the basis for distinct
sources and domains of information and knowledge from which search
engines may crawl. They are reflected in search results. Politics,
regional or national, could also play an important role, especially in
places where freedom of political speech is not guaranteed. Another
aspect of ‘borders’ has to do with technology itself in the form of
geo-location. If you are located in Amsterdam, your search results are
more likely to receive localized results based on your IP address. This
aspect has become more and more prevalent over time, as search engines
do not offer universal results to a query anymore. The degree and scope
of personalization, however, remains largely a mystery. It has been
revealed that Google uses over 70 different ‘signals’ to personalize
results. Broadly, Google defines a person in three aspects: your
geographical location, search history and your relationships or social
networks. These are frames or ‘borders’ imposed on the user. A last
aspect I want to emphasize is economic incentives for localized delivery
of information. A lot of our search behavior is ‘local’ – whether you
want to get a haircut or buy a product at a nearby grocery store.
Localized advertising is pushing for localization in search results.
While localization makes sense in some cases, it can turn out badly in
others where the need to transcend parochialism is more important. In
general, a variety of factors aside from personal idiosyncrasies –
linguistic/cultural, political, technological and economic – have come
to shape our search results to be more local or parochial.

**VD: You mentioned that possible alternatives could be offered to
reimagine what search engines could become. What possible alternatives
do you have in mind?**

MJ: When it comes to news, to current events, it is quite inadequate for
the user to only receive results that are based on location. China is a
very extreme example. In some cases, you do not get any alternative
perspectives at all on critical events. During the Arab Spring, search
results were filtered in such a way that the only news you got in China
were from state sanctioned sources. It tended to focus on the
government’s efforts of rescuing the Chinese from the troubled regions
and China’s investments in those areas. Search results made little to no
mention of the protests or demonstrations for fear of domestic
repercussions. When these did get mentioned, they were presented as
chaotic and threatening. Stability trumps everything. That is all you
get. Given the current political arrangement in China, change will be
hard to come by. Search reflects rather than challenges the political
make-up of the regime.

But people elsewhere may have more options. Imagine, if Google can
personalize your search results, then why doesn’t Google give you the
option to personalize your own results? For instance, why can’t I design
my own filters if I choose to be more internationally minded? Search
engines could give users more freedom in the design of their own search
results and the kinds of information they want to receive. Google, for
instance, has been experimenting with personalized Google News since
2011 where ‘borders’ could be rendered less relevant by users
themselves. Certainly, by choosing one’s own filters, one has to live
with a set of self-imposed ‘filter bubbles’. But this may allow for a
greater degree of self-determination rather than an opaque set of
algorithmic rules over which we have no control. There have been
suggestions that users should minimize or completely abandon the use of
search engines because using them would subject users to a set of opaque
algorithms (not unlike a robotic monster) that feeds on, lives off, and
profits from our incessant use. This is a difficult dilemma. Will people
stop using search engines entirely? Probably not. But could there be
more algorithmic scrutiny, user control and privacy protection? Much
more likely. In fact, there are alternative search engines out there
(e.g. DuckDuckGo and Blekko) that offer users more privacy protection
and options.

There is also a lot of room for independent evaluation of search and
search quality. Many of us use one search engine on a regular basis, be
it Google in much of the world or Baidu in China. As the amount of
information explodes, the job of delivering better information becomes
harder, not easier. The notable differences between search results
delivered to the same person from different search engines naturally beg
such questions as ‘which is better?’ and ‘based on what standards?’ The
problem, however, is that perfectly ranked search results for any given
query do not exist. Algorithms are a kind of simulacra in the
Baudrillardian sense. Yet, we can still compare search engines and
reveal their preferences or prejudices, and in some cases even abuses of
their surveillance and monopolist power.

**VD: What about the Chinese state search engines, how do they perform?**

MJ: In China, there are three state-run search engines. One of them
is well known as the first national Chinese search engine. It’s called
Jike, which in Chinese means ‘instant’ or ‘immediate’. Some call it
‘geek’. Its parent company is *People’s Daily Online*, which is
publicly listed on Shanghai Stock Exchange. Another one is Panguso; it’s
a search engine backed by Xinhua News Agency (a state news agency) and
China Mobile (also a state-owned enterprise publicly listed on both the
New York Stock Exchange and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange). The third one
is a search engine associated with CCTV, China’s official television
station, now with an online presence through CNTV. Recently, Jike got
into financial troubles and has merged with Panguso.

So diverse parties of interest are at play here and the reasoning behind
state-sponsored search engines is quite complex and convoluted. I
explored the phenomenon of ‘national search engines’ in a paper that
will appear in *Policy & Internet*. First, security was a major concern.
All three state-backed search engines were put into play immediately
after Google left mainland China as a response to Secretary Hilary
Clinton’s ‘Internet freedom’ speech. It was clear from publicly
available Chinese Communist Party’s documents that China’s top leaders
consider ‘internet sovereignty’ and control over information within
Chinese borders a top priority. They attached great importance to the
‘management’ of the internet in China and understood the centrality of
search engines in an information society.

Second, such an acute sense of security was heightened by two subsequent
pivotal events – the Arab Spring and the Snowden revelations, both of
which have prompted a global trend of re-nationalization of the
internet. Repercussions of the Arab Spring are still unraveling but the
quick toppling of several dictatorships sent a palpable jolt to Chinese
leaders in Beijing who were obsessed with ‘stability’. National search
engines were part and parcel of increased government control asserted
over the Chinese internet. In the post-Snowden world, there were several
important signs of re-nationalization of the internet, including
Russia’s development of its own national search engine *Sputnik*, and
discussions of a ‘national internet’ in both Germany and Brazil. To what
extent ‘national internets’ will materialize in Germany and Brazil is
not clear but in China, there is already a *de facto* ‘national
internet’.

Third, financial considerations also played an important role in China’s
state search engine experiment, where the Party wishes to profit from
China’s surging information and search markets. Since China started to
implement economic reforms in the late 1970s, state media have become
more independent financially, although not quite free from the state’s
ideological management. Chinese mainstream media, a euphemism for
state-owned media, absolutely dominate China’s traditional media from
books and magazines to radio and TV, however not so much in online
media. State propaganda has been trying to figure out how to engage
users and do propaganda work online. *People’s Daily*, the party’s
mouthpiece, has developed a successful website *People’s Daily*
*Online*whose online traffic is among the top 20 in China (based on
Alexa data). It seems that, with national search engine Jike, *People’s
Daily* *Online*hopes to expand its sphere of influence and become more
profitable financially. However, I think authorities may have
underestimated the effort it takes to develop a commercially viable
search engine. Jike failed technologically, strategically and
managerially. Jike’s failure, however, has not put an end to state
search engine experiments in China. After Jike’s merger with Panguso,
the future of state search engines remains highly uncertain but is
undoubtedly subject to both politics and competition.

**VD: You mentioned the Great Firewall of China, and I remember reading
somewhere that it is suspected that regimes such as Cuba, Zimbabwe, or
Belarus have obtained surveillance technology from China. So it seems
that China actually exports this kind of approach.**

MJ: That’s right. When we talk about Chinese search engines or the
Chinese internet in general, we tend to neglect or underestimate China’s
reach overseas. Apart from domestic growth driven by nearly 600 million
Chinese internet users, China’s rise technologically, politically,
economically, and military is also manifested overseas. In fact, Chinese
technology companies, state-owned or commercially operated, seek to grow
abroad through international trade as many others do. This includes a
unique category of surveillance and filtering technologies that the
state or state-related companies have developed and wanted to export.
While China has previously imported surveillance technologies from such
Western companies as Cisco, Microsoft, and Nokia, it has been developing
its own surveillance technologies that might end up in other countries
as you mentioned. Chinese companies such as Huawei (a telecommunication
company and the largest producer of telecommunications equipment in the
world) have been quite successful in exporting tech products. Lately,
news reports surfaced that Huawei plans to sell technologies to Iran to
help ‘clean’ its internet. While many of Huawei’s low-cost, functional
tech products can aid growth and development in some of the world’s
poorest areas in Africa, South America, and Asia, it is also competing
against other Western companies in selling filtering technologies to
authoritarian regimes.

**VD: What do we know about the way that users deal with these censorship
regimes? Is there research being done on how they try to counteract
this?**

MJ: This issue has attracted the attention of a lot of Western countries
and reporters. Sure, some Chinese users are aware that their search
results are being filtered. Users who are knowledgeable and tech-savvy
are able to use proxy servers and VPNs to route around censorship. But
we do not know how many people are aware of this issue or how many
actually care about their search results enough to seek alternative
search engines and processes. I believe the majority of users either
don’t know or don’t care. Maybe their information needs are met by the
filtered results. Maybe they will not bother paying extra money or doing
extra work just to get ‘better’ search results. I am not too optimistic
about it. People who have a lot of business or academic connections with
the outside world are more likely to employ alternative strategies. In
fact, most foreign businesses in China have been using proxies or VPNs
for a long time. For them, it’s a standard operation. Also, individuals
who rely on a daily dosage of alterative information from valuable
external sources such as *The New York Times*, the Chinese version of
*Wall Street Journal,*BBC Chinese or Twitter are likely to use
circumvention tools on a more regular basis.

**VD: We talked about Google and Baidu, the biggest players in China. I
recently read that Bing was reportedly censoring results from searches
conducted in simplified Chinese[^5], so the ones
used in mainland China, but not the ones in traditional Chinese
characters used in Hong Kong, Taiwan, or Macau.**

MJ: I believe that confirms what we talked about earlier. Bing’s
censoring of its search results in mainland China is to comply with
(mainland) Chinese laws. It does not censor results in traditional
Chinese perhaps because most of the people who use traditional Chinese
are from Hong Kong, Taiwan, or Macau, regions with different speech
regulations. But it would be interesting to learn, for instance, if
mainland searchers using traditional Chinese for their queries might get
uncensored results. In many ways, censorship is a language game.

**VD: One more thing: what is your opinion on the importance of search
engines? Can Google and other search engines substitute knowledge
somehow? Or are they more like a tool that shapes and distributes
knowledge through their rankings and mechanisms? And if these search
engine mechanisms can be controlled by political authorities and
interest groups, how does that affect knowledge?**

MJ: Many people equate search engines with knowledge, and probably most
search engines want people to think that way. A lot of us use search
engines to access information and search engines do matter. Wikipedia is
so popular precisely because search engines like Google have made it a
default ‘knowledge site.’ By doing so, search engines like Google define
to some extent what constitutes useful information or knowledge. Every
search engine wants to crawl and index as much online content as
possible, but it’s impossible to index everything. In 2008 Google
announced it had indexed one trillion unique URLs. Lately the number has
gone up to 60 trillion. But even that is a small fraction of what’s
available out there and it is not clear that all that gets indexed can
be considered useful knowledge.

It is misleading, I think, to equate search engines with knowledge. To
me, knowledge means a set of facts, truths and beliefs learned
throughout time. Knowledge can be gained through experience and human
interactions. People have always learned through curiosity, trial and
error, intuition, rational thinking, and we learn a lot from others.
Since learning is situated in various social and institutional contexts,
knowledge can be considered the result of a highly social and
culture-specific process. Lately, we have been able to locate
information much faster through a process facilitated by search engines,
but it is dangerous to think knowledge is a mere result of filtering and
algorithms.

The equation of search with knowledge, I suspect, may have something to
do with our fear in dealing with information overload and our huge
investments in information technologies. By equating search with
knowledge, we take comfort in the fantasy that the world’s information
and knowledge is at our fingertips. The linear progression
‘data-information-knowledge-wisdom’, to me, represents our wishful
thinking rather than a real process of acquiring knowledge that is
always messier, harder and more serendipitous. This is not to deny the
usefulness of search, but to point out knowledge is much more than
search filtering and algorithms.

Search engines, political authorities, business interests and powerful
interest groups can certainly impact the process and mechanisms of
search. In the end, whatever results Google, Baidu, or any search engine
presents to the user depends very much on what the search engine can
crawl and index, what it desires or is allowed to present. It’s a highly
problematic process. Unfortunately, we don’t have a very good
understanding of its specifics. In certain regimes, the information
sought by users is sometimes hidden and forbidden. Steep barriers still
exit, preventing people from participating fully in global conversations
and knowledge productions. Much needs to be done to open dialogues and
increase access to information and knowledge without losing sight of the
need to preserve user privacy and integrity.

##References {.references}

Cashmore, Pete. ‘Bing Accused of Censoring Simplified Chinese Language
Searches’, Mashable.com, 21 November 2009,
http://mashable.com/2009/11/21/bing-chinese-queries/.

Jiang, Min. ‘The Business and Politics of Search Engines: A Comparative
Study of Baidu’s and Google’s Search Results of Internet Events in
China’, *New Media & Society*, 22 April 2012,
http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2013/04/18/1461444813481196.full.

Jiang, Min. ‘Search Concentration, Bias, and Parochialism: A Comparative
Study of Baidu, Jike, and Google’s Search Results from China’, Presented
at the 41st Research Conference on Communication, Information and
Internet Policy (TPRC), 27-29 September 2013, George Mason University
School of Law, Arlington, VA, U.S.

Liao, Han-Teng. ‘“Wikipedias” (or its Copycat) Dominate “Chinese” Search
Engine Result Pages (SERPs)’, 6 May 2013,
http://people.oii.ox.ac.uk/hanteng/2013/05/06/wikipedias-or-its-copycat-dominate-chinese-search-engine-result-pages-serps/.

Pariser, Eli. *The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You*,
New York: Penguin, 2011.

##Notes {.notes}

[^1]: Min Jiang, ‘The Business and Politics of Search Engines: A
    Comparative Study of Baidu’s and Google’s Search Results of Internet
    Events in China’, *New Media & Society*, 22 April 2012,
    http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2013/04/18/1461444813481196.full.

[^2]: Min Jiang, ‘Search Concentration, Bias, and Parochialism: A
    Comparative Study of Baidu, Jike, and Google’s Search Results from
    China’, presented at the 41st Research Conference on Communication,
    Information and Internet Policy (TPRC), 27-29 September 2013, George
    Mason University School of Law, Arlington, VA, USA.

[^3]: Han-Teng Liao, ‘“Wikipedias” (or its Copycat) Dominate “Chinese”
    Search Engine Result Pages (SERPs)’, 6 May 2013,
    http://people.oii.ox.ac.uk/hanteng/2013/05/06/wikipedias-or-its-copycat-dominate-chinese-search-engine-result-pages-serps/.

[^4]: Eli Pariser, *The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from
    You*, New York: Penguin, 2011.

[^5]: Pete Cashmore, ‘Bing Accused of Censoring Simplified Chinese
    Language Searches’, Mashable.com, 21 November 2009,
    http://mashable.com/2009/11/21/bing-chinese-queries/.



